THE GAME OF CHESS THE GAME OF CHESS A SYSTEMATIC TEXT-BOOK FOR BEGINNERS AND MORE EXPERIENCED PLAYERS BY Dr. TARRASCH TRANSLATED AND ARRANGED WITH SOME ADDITIONAL MATTER BY G. E. SMITH, B.A. (CHESS EDITOR OF THE FIELD) AND T. G. BONE, B.A. CHATTO AND WINDUS LONDON 4235 PUBLISHED 1035 MADE IW GREAT BRITAIN BY R. a R. CLARK, LTD. EDINBURGH ALL RIGHTS RESERVED THE ENGLISH EDITION OF THIS WORK IS DEDICATED TO MY GOOD FRIEND Mr. G. E. SMITH CHESS EDITOR OF THE FIELD NOTE TO ENGLISH EDITION majority of serious chess players all over the world, there -&-may be some readers of this book who have never heard of him, his fine record as a player and his great services to chess and chess players as a writer. A short summary of his career may, therefore, not be out of place. Siegbert Tarrasch was born at Breslau on March 5, 1862, At the age of eighteen he commenced the study of medicine. After obtaining his degree he practised for a short time at Geroldsgriin, then for many years at Nuremburg and later at Munich. He learnt to play chess at an early age and made very rapid progress. His first appearance in an international masters’ tournament was in 1885 at Hamburg (where he tied with four other players for the second place), his last in 1928 at Berlin (where an illness compelled his retirement after the third round). During his long career he won no fewer than seven international tournaments, two of them without the loss of a game. In matches he defeated Walbrodt (Germany), Marshall (U.S8.A.) and Mieses (Germany)—all by wide margins —and drew with Tchigorin (Russia) and Schlechter (Austria). Unfortunately the greatest triumph—the World’s Champion- ship—was denied him, for in 1908 he was defeated in a match by the then champion Dr. Lasker. The last years of his life were devoted to literary work on the game. He died at Munich on February 17, 1934. + + It is strange that, although Dr. Tarrasch, the Praeceptor Germaniae as he was called, was a prolific writer on the game and his works were universally acknowledged to be of very great instructional value, it has been left to his last book, Das Schachspiel, published in 1931, to be the first to appear in an English edition. This book has had a really phenomenal success of which Dr. Tarrasch was justly proud and he was delighted at the prospect of it being translated into English. Our great regret is that he has not lived to see this edition. In a letter written about a month before his death Dr. Tarrasch announced hisintention of making in the section on the vu ‘ LTHOUGH the name of Tarrasch is well known to the vast Vill NOTE TO ENGLISH EDITION Openings various slight alterations and additions, the results of his untiring analytical investigations during the last three years. However, in the time that elapsed between his announcing this intention and his sudden death he had, apparently, not been able to start on the work of writing down this new matter, for a diligent search among his papers revealed nothing on the subject. Thus we were faced with the alternatives of present- ing a translation of the book as it stood or of incorporating in it such additional matter on the Openings as Dr. Tarrasch had published in the magazine Tarraschs Schachzeitung which he ran for the last eighteen months of his life. We decided on the latter course. . In incorporating this additional matter we have restricted ourselves to the additions and, in a few cases, alterations to lines of play already dealt with in Das Schachspiel. Exceptions have been made in the cases of (1) the now popular defence to the Ruy Lopez by 3....P-—QR3 and 4....P-—Q3 and (2) the attack against the Caro-Kann Defence by 2. P—Q4, 3.PxP and 4. P—QB4. We should mention, too, that the wording of the additional matter has occasionally been slightly con- densed, but the reader may rest assured that nothing of importance has been omitted. A few slight alterations, due to the different notations used in England and Germany, have had to be made in the section on the Elements. Naturally, the description of the board has had to be modified. Finally, five more games have been included in this edition, thus bringing the number up to twelve. Of these games Nos. 8, 9 and 10 have been taken from Tarraschs Schachzettung and Nos. 11 and 12 from Dr. Tarrasch’s book Die moderne Schach- partie. The notes are in every case his own. G. E. 8S. T. G. B. AUTHOR’S PREFACE very chess player will readily agree that chess, that wonderful gift from the East, is not only the noblest and finest of all games but, standing, as it does, on the border- line between game, art and science, is undoubtedly one of the greatest intellectual delights. It has only one disadvantage— it is very difficult to learn. That disadvantage I hope to have removed by this book. There would be little point in adding yet another to the many text-books if this one were merely developed according to the same scheme as the others. There is, however, some- thing completely new in my method of teaching the Elements and the Middle Game. I maintain that nobody completely ignorant of chess could understand it from a study of any of the text-books we have at present and simply because the method they employ to teach the Elements is as faulty as if, to teach a child to talk, one were to deliver a lecture on the grammatical structure of the German language. I employ quite another method and one analogous to that a mother uses to teach her child to talk. I play with the beginner from the very start in that I put before him simple positions and from them explain the fundamentals of chess. It is the intuitive method of instruction. In this way the pupil learns chess quite easily, of that I am convinced. He learns by playing and during the play I am continually advancing from the simple to the difficult and helping him to acquire ‘‘chess vision’. In subsequent sections, also, my classification and treatment of the material is quite new. The other manuals, after dealing with the Elements, treat of the various openings, explaining each of them from actual games. They then proceed to the End-Game. I reverse the order. I begin with the End-Game since obviously it is easier for the beginner to deal with a few men than with the entire thirty-two. Here again, I introduce much that is new. (For example, I have explained so simply and clearly the very difficult End-Game of King, Bishop and Knight v. King that it can now easily be mastered by every- body.) On the other hand, I have omitted all those End-Games which do not occur in actual play. 1X x AUTHOR’S PREFACE After the End-Game I have a section dealing with the Middle Game, the most important part of the game. (This other manuals have omitted because the way to teach the Middle Game was not known.) Here I trace back to fixed and constantly recurring types the manifold combinations of chess and in this way, by giving numerous examples, I endeavour to teach the beginner combination play. This section I have called “Typical Middle-game Combinations and Attacks”. It is the most exhaustive and most important of the book, and, as also the subsequent sections, will prove a very profitable study even for experienced players. Finally I come to the most difficult part of the game—the Opening. I start with a general chapter, ‘““The General Theory of the Opening’’, in which I present an entirely new and original Theory of chess. (This up to now has never been done; what has hitherto been understood in chess circles as Theory is, in reality, quite different, nothing more nor less than Practice!!) This chapter is followed by “The Various Open- ings”, which deals with the important lines of practically all the openings. Naturally, it does not set out to be exhaustive. A few games, very fully annotated, form the concluding section. The reader must not take it amiss that they are but seven in number.! There should, of course, be at least a hundred—but then this book would be doubled or even trebled in size. However, in the section on the Middle Game I have included the most important parts of over a hundred games. Naturally, for further progress the study of master games is most important—but only of those games which are accom- panied by the most complete and apposite notes. From faultily annotated games faulty play is very easily learned. For this further study I recommend my Drethundert Schach- partien—from which whole generations of chess players have learned the finer points of chess—and in particular my Die moderne Schachpartie (4th edition, published by Hans Hedewigs Nachf., Leipzig). So that the beginner may make the best use of this book, I must give him a little important advice. His very understand- able desire to play a game as soon as possible he must suppress. To play games while still in the beginner’s stage is the surest way to become an unskilful player. Only when he has again and again worked through the Elements and has thoroughly 1 In this edition twelve games are given. AUTHOR’S PREFACE xi grasped all the combinations there explained, only when he has studied and re-studied the End-Game and has thus quickened his insight, only when he has assimilated the enor- mous amount of material in the Middle Game—well, then he has long since ceased to be a weak player, even though he has never played a game. Then he has only to grasp those prin- ciples laid down in ‘“‘The General Theory of the Opening” and he has at last progressed so far that he is ready to play games. He will already be superior to the vast majority of club players. After each game he will do well to study its opening in ““The Various Openings”. If he has ambition, if he would become a master—well, practice makes the master. Any moderately talented player, he need not be exceptionally gifted, can become a master. But really, there is no need for that. The right standpoint is to play for pleasure—and do not think that pleasure is proportional to skill. The greatest bunglers are constantly deriving the greatest pleasure from chess—they go into ecstasies of delight when their Knight forks a King and Queen. Chess is a form of intellectual productiveness, therein lies its peculiar charm. Intellectual productiveness is one of the greatest joys—if not the greatest one—of human existence. It is not everyone who can write a play, or build a bridge, or even make a good joke. But in chess everyone can, everyone must, be intellectually productive and so can share in this select delight. I have always a slight feeling of pity for the man who has no knowledge of chess, just as I would pity the man who has remained ignorant of love. Chess, like love, like music, has the power to make men happy. The way to this happiness I have tried to show in this book. bn TARRASCH Monica, January 1931 CONTENTS Nore Tro ENGuiisH EDITION vii AUTHOR’S PREFACE ix Part 1: THE ELEMENTS ] The Mate with the Queen 9 The Mate with the Rook 11 Queen v. Rook 13 Queen v. an advanced passed pawn 23 A Short Summary of the Elements 31 Castling 33 A few common Chess Terms 34 The Relative Values of the Mcn 35 The Notation 36 The most important Laws of tho Game 37 Part 2: THE END-GAME 38 Queen v. Queen 38 Queen v. Rook 39 The Mate with Bishop and Knight 40 Rook and Bishop v. Rook 44 Rook and Knight v. Rook 46 Rook v. Bishop 47 Rook vw. Knight 48 Rook Endings 49 (1) Philidor’s Drawn Position 49 (2) Lucena’s Winning Position 52 (3) Some typical Winning Positions 54 (4) Two united passed pawns in a Rook ending 54 (5) An extra pawn in a Rook ending 57 (6) Rook v. pawn 59 (7) Rook v. two united passed pawns 60 End-Games with Minor Pieces 61 (1) Bishop and Rook’s pawn 61 (2) Knight and pawn 62 (3) Knight v. King and pawn 64 (4) Bishop v. Knight 65 (5) Bishop and pawns 65 Pawn Endings 68 (1) Berger’s Square 72 (2) The Counting Method 73 Chess Problems 76 Some Longer End-Games 77 xiii xiv CONTENTS Part 3: THE MIDDLE GAME (Typical Middle-game Combinations and Attacks. The Exploitation of Mistakes) Pinning Double Attacks Unguarded Men The Destruction of a Guard Illusory Protection Discovered Attacks The Imprisonment of a Bishop The Capture of the Queen after her Penetration to QKt7 (Q x QKtP) The Forcible Exposure of the King The Attack with the King’s Bishop’s pawn The Attack along the King’s Bishop’s File The Attack on the point KB7 The Broken-up Castled Position The Attack along the Knight’s File The Knight Sacrifice at KKt7 The point KR6 as a Target for Attack The Attack along the Rook’s File The Attack on the point KR7 with Queen and Bishop The Bishop Sacrifice at KR7 The Sacrifice of the Queen or Rook at KR7 The Knight Sacrifice at KKt6 The Attack on a Castled Position not protected by a Knight at KB3 Two Bishops against a Castled Position Some possible Dangers of Castling on the Queen’s side The Smothered Mate The Mate on the back rank: Insufficient Guard of the base Perpetual Check The Rook on the open file and on the seventh rank The Effect beyond an enemy man of Pieces that move in straight lines The Passed Pawn Advanced Pawns The point QB6 as a Target for Attack The point QKt6 as a Target for Attack. Turning a Flank General Principles for the Conduct of the Middle Game PAGE 97 114 129 133 137 140 144 146 147 151 163 156 157 161 165 167 169 171 174 177 177 180 181 182 184 189 190 199 201 208 211 213 216 CONTENTS Part 4: THE OPENING (a) GeneRau Section. The Theory of Chess, Prin- ciples of Play, General Theory of the Opening The Forces The Relative Values of the Men Space Time The Balancing of Tempi Object of the Opening: (1) Development Blocking Moves Object of the Opening: (2) Capture of the Centre Attack. Gambit The holding-back of the Centre Pawns Open and Close Games (6b) Tue Various OPENINGS The King’s Knight’s Gamo Philidor’s Defence Petroff’s Defence Giuoco Piano Evans Gambit Two Knights’ Defence Scotch Game Scotch Gambit Ruy Lopez Three and Four Knights’ Games Ponziani’s Opening Bishop’s Opening Centre Game Danish Gambit Vienna Game King’s Gambit French Defence Sicilian Defence Centre Counter Game Caro-Kann Defence Alekhine’s Defence Queen’s Gambit Queen’s Pawn Game Dutch Defence Bird’s Opening Indian Defence Réti’s Opening English Opening xV PAGE 219 219 233 xV1 CONTENTS Pant 5: GAMES © GO -1 GH Ct wm 69 bo . Alekhine v. Yates . Tchigorin v. Zukertort . Tarrasch v. von Scheve Tarrasch v. Schlechter . Batik v. Dyckhoff . Breyer v. Tarrasch . Tarrasch v. Pillsbury . Alekhine v. Yates . L. Steiner v. Flohr . Kleefstra v. Euwe . Spielmann v, P. Johner . Spielmann v. Tarrasch PAGE 359 359 363 367 370 376 380 386 392 399 407 412 417 THE GAME OF CHESS PART 1 THE ELEMENTS EFORE anything else, the beginner must learn the name —or, rather, the two names—of each of the squares on the board and must practise recognising the squares by heir names. This he will be able to do after he has studied he following diagram. (In diagrams the player of the White orces is always assumed to be seated at the lower end of the (board, the player of the Black at the upper. The board is so placed that each player has a white square at his right-hand earner. ) The 64 squares form vertical files and horizontal ranks. In the English notation the files are called after the names of the pieces which at the beginning of the game occupy their “nd syuares. Going from left to right in the following diagram -remember White is at the lower end, Black at the upper— ve have the Queen’s Rook’s file, the Queen’s Knight’s, the (Jueen’s Bishop’s, the Queen’s, the King’s, the King’s Bishop’ 8, the King’s Knight’s Oe and the King’s Key 81 K1 KBAG ucen Rook’s. The ranks : i , QB8 oe cay 2 ae KKCB8ZK 7 are numbered from 1QKt7; We Q7 Fier a 8) each player Grae KR7 Moot Ne mmm, counting from his QRS easoes 4 yoy K3 Ae oy K no own end ae board. ee RA KO SDs pd KGS Thus Black’s eighth a ee Gey KB 4 1K KR4 yank is White’s first, 74 Pcostteans joy K 5 el K Kt ike 4 ve es Ke iy inna White’s eighth is Black’s first. The beginner will find in diagram No. 1 the names of the squares. The upper symbols in each square show Black’s name for it, 1 B 2 THE ELEMENTS the lower White’s. The abbreviations used are: K for King’s, Q ei Queen’ 8, R for Rook’s, B for Bishop’s and Kt for t’s. creas abbreviation of ‘square’ —is frequently used instead of 1. *k* Please take the two Kings—since they are the most important pieces, they are the biggest—and put the White one at White’s KB6 and the Black at Black’s KKtl. Then take a Whit« Rook—Rooks are the big round pieces that look like the towers, ats of an old-time castle—and plac it at White’s QKt1 (No. 2). ‘ ” ma Y The Rook moves from QKt! t a QKt8, or in the usual notati 1.R-Kt8 (“ —” signifies “to”)| — 7 As you see, the Rook movet Y in a straight line. It can move Y Y along a file or a rank and, in each case, in either direction. ; — Y Thus it could go from QKtl t Y QR1, Ql, KKtl, KR, ete. om Wi Tv ah z the rank or to any of the squares TET J ja 7 between QKt1 and QKt8 on the; file. To continue—1l. R — Kt&. ee the Rook has arrived at Kt8, it is attacking the Blaclx ing, which now stands in one of its lines of action. Such am attack on a King is described as a “‘check”’ ( = ‘‘King”’) and aly such times the player making the attack calls “Check!” Thai; is because an attack on the King, a check, must in all circum stances be attended to. In some way or other the King mus escape from the check. But where can the King move? Sine the King can move only one square at a time in any direction only KBl, KR1, KB2, KKt2 and KR2 need be considered He is not allowed to go to KB1 since there he would be just as: much exposed to the Rook’s attack as at KKtl. At KR1 alsd) he would still be in check. Can he go to KB2? A King must; never go too near to another. At KB2 he would be within. striking distance of the opposing King. The King must nevey: 1 These abbreviations are also used to denote the names of the pieces}. Thus K may stand for ‘‘King” or “King’s”, Q for “Queen” or “‘Queen’s’’}, etc. THE ELEMENTS 8 move to a square which is attacked by an opposing man since he would thus put himself inte check. Therefore he may not go to KB2 nor, for the same reason, to KKt2. But what of KR2? That square is not attacked by any enemy man. He may—and must—move to KR2. Thus the two moves read 1. R-—Kt8, ch, K-—R2. (“Ch” is an abbreviation of ““check’’.) Now please put up the following position: the White King at White’s K6, the White Rook at White’s KR3, and the Black King at Black’s K1 (No. 3). The Kings are now standing the least possible distance from one another—they may not go any closer. They are immedi- ately opposite to each other, in Nace ee Bs ee = = = = Rook is a ec ir oT oa a a’ y Kon, whisk cp a re Rook's a .. Y Wa, new line of action. Thus the Yj Y ind wt oo 8 o Wa, Wa es 5 _ Sams Rook gives check: 1.R — R8, ch. — as mo 2 either of those squares he would be as much in check as at K1. not get out of check. Then he is “‘checkmated”’ and the game iy ianished—for the checkmating of a King is the object of the How can the Black King get out of check now? He may Also, he may not go to K2, KB2 a" “os a “— or Q2, since he may not go too gaiie. White has won. Accordingly the move is written: }.J.-R8, mate. (‘‘Mate” is derived from a Persian word and not go to KBI1 or QI, for on to the enemy King. He cannot move any more, he can- merins “dead’’.) {i in the last line of play a Black Bishop—the Bishops are those slim medium-sized pieces—were at Black’s QKt5, then ate could be delayed (No. 4). Black could cover the check— benta escape from check—by playing (in reply to 1. R — R8, oh) Bishop to KB1 where it interrupts the line of action of the Rook, is in its way. Just as the Rook moves in all directions 4 THE ELEMENTS along the ranks and files, so the Bishop moves in all directions along the diagonals. The moves now read: 1]. R -—R8, ch, B-KBIl. But now the Rook can capture the Bishop which is in its line of action. In chess a man can capture an enemy Weg man standing in its line of action, " and this it does by removing the enemy man from the board —after which that man is out of the game—and occupying the square vacated by its victim. Let us suppose the Rook does capturethe Bishop: 2. R x B, ch. (The “x” signifies ‘‘takes’’.) But now, since the King can move one square in any direc- tion, the Rook has come within moving and capturing distance of the King, who would simply recapture: 2...K xR. The King at K1 guards the Bishop at KB1. Thus White would have gained nothing; only the two Kings would be left and the game would be undecided— a draw. Neither player would have won, neither would have lost. But, nevertheless, there is a way for White to capture and win the Bishop for nothing. He has only to think out what his opponent can do at the next move. Black may not move the Bishop otherwise his King would be in check. A player may not make a move that places his King in check. So the Bishop may not move, the Bishop is pinned. So, if it were Black’s turn to move, he could move only his King, and since moves to KB2, K2 and Q2 are prevented by White’s King, Black’s could go only to Ql. But this move would leave his Bishop un- guarded, and it could safely be taken by the Rook. Actually, however, it is White’s turn to move. He makes a move which does not materially alter the position, viz. 2.R-—Kt8. After that Black’s King must move to QI]: 2.... K — QI, and now the Rook captures the Bishop: 3.R xB, or rather, 3. R xB, ch, for at KB8 the Rook is again attacking the King. There is only one possible move: 3....K-—B2. Now, with a Rook ahead, White must win—as we shall see later. A Rook can always force a mate against a lone King. White’s 2nd move in the above play is, on the surface, quite THE ELEMENTS 5 motiveless. Actually, White has done nothing at all but waste time; he has formally fulfilled his obligation to move but merely in order to force his opponent to change the position. Such a move is called a ‘‘waiting move’’. By means of it White has sonstrained his opponent to move, has placed him, as we say in Germany, in Zugzwang.* White had, instead of the Rook move, another move (2. K - B6) by means of which, in just the same way, he would have forced Black’s King to relinquish his guard on the Bishop. In reply to that move, Black’s King would have had to move to Q1 or Q2 and then the Rook could have taken the Bishop. * Let us take once again Position No. 2. After the moves con- sidered there, 1. R—Kt8, ch, K—R2, White again makes a waiting move. He has many such at his disposal—for example, without materially altering the position, the Rook can go from Kt8 to QR8, QB8, Q8, K8 or KB8. Not, however, to KKt8 or KR8 for, if the Rook were played to either of those squares, Black’s King would capture it—White would have thrown his Rock away. But let us suppose that White makes one of the good waiting moves, 2. R -QR8 or QB8 or Q8 or K8 or KB8. Then Black has only one move. The King may not move to KXKtl1 or KR1 because on either of those squares he would be in the line of action of the Rook. He may not go to KKtz2 or KKt3 because there he would be too near to the enemy King. Only KR3 is left him, therefore 2....K —R3. Now the Kings are egain in Opposition, always a very dangerous position for the defender since the one King robs the other of three squares. White’s Rook gives check at KR8—and not only check but mate since the three squares KKt2, KKt3 and KKt4 are closed fe the Black King by the White and the squares KR2, KR3 d KR4 are attacked by the Rook. Therefore 3. R —R8, mate—the game is over, White has won. * The following play, very curious but extremely instructive for beginners, runs on similar lines: Once again the Kings are in Opposition (No. 5); once again, * This word, meaning “‘Disagreeable obligation to move’’, 1s used occamonally in this book. 6 THE ELEMENTS therefore, mating continuations are possible. Curiously enough, White can start with whatever Rook move he pleases —he will always mate in three moves. Only he must always force the Black King back again into Opposition. For example, 1.R-—~KR5, K -QI. Now White must prevent the escape of the King across the King’s file. This he manages quite easily by placing his Rook in that file: 2. R-—K65. Now the King must return into Opposition: 2....K—Bl. There follows 3.R —K8, mate. Or, (after 1. R—-—KRS5) 1.... K-Ktl. Now White by 2.R-QR65 forces the King back to B1; 2.... K —~ Bl; 3. R — R8, mate. Or 1.R-K5, K-Q]; 2. R-K1, K2, K3, K4 or K6, K - Bl; 3. R —K8, mate. Or 1.R-Q5, K -Ktl; 2. R-QR5, K-Bl1; 3. R—R8, mate. Or 1.R-QKt5, K-Q1; 2. R —K5, etc. : Or 1.R-QR5, K-Ktl (or 1....K-Ql; 2. R-—K5, etc.); 2.R—-RIl, R2, R3, R4 or R6, K-Bl1; 3. R—R8, mate. Or 1.R-Bl, B2, B3 or B4, K-Q1; 2. R—K1, K2, K3 or K4 respectively, K-Bl; 3. R—K8, mate. Or 1.R-B1, B2, B3 or B4, K-Ktl; 2. R-QRI, QR2, QR3 or QR4 respectively, K -Bl; 3. R -R8, mate. It will be good practice for the beginner to try all the possible first moves for the Rook that I have not mentioned and to bring about a mate according to the given scheme. Suppose we change the position somewhat and introduce # Black Bishop (No. 6). It is Black’s turn to move. White has just moved his King, from B7 to B6. (It is not necessary to say from KB7 to KB6,} | He now threatens R — R8, mate. (Again, it is not necessary to say R —-KR8, mate). Black has now at his disposal a splendid, move which prevents mate and at the same time destroys all’ White’s hopes of victory. It is 1...B-—R65,ch! (An ex- clamation mark denotes a very good move, a question mark | THE ELEMENTS 7 a bad one.) After that move White cannot carry out his in- tention of mating his opponent. The check has precedence, the check must be attended to. ‘Therefore the White King moves from B6 to either B7, K6, K5 or B5. Naturally, he cannot move to K7 for there he would be as much in check as at B6, After any one of these moves by the King the Bishop captures the Rook. The move of the King to B6 was, obvi- ously, a glaring oversight which cost the Rook. White over- looked the check at R5 by the Bishop. Black, for his part, made full use of his opponent’s oversight. Admittedly, after No. 6 No. 7 Pe an oon a 4 en “ei “ae “mie Th “Ss ae, an ei oo ; = al a a A i, 8 7 foe & 7 owe 2... 38x R Black cannot win the game since a single Bishop cannot mate the opposing King. But at least he has saved the game, has made it a draw. Reiween a Rook and a Bishop very interesting struggles are possihle—for example, in positions Nos. 7-10 in which the ghsential feature is the Opposition of the Kings which (as we fhave ) already seen) makes mating continuations possible. In No. 7 White plays 1.R-KRI1 and attacks the Bishop, that ae . say, threatens to take it. The Bishop can now move to es t6, B5, B2 or Ktl. If it moves to K4 or Q3, it is taken by the White King into whose sphere of action it has placed itself and, if, instead, to Kt8, then it may be taken by the Rook. If t moves to Kt6, Bé, Be, Ktl, or Kt8 then the Rook gives at mS the mate we have already met. If, instead of the Bishop, “ha Black King moves, then the Rook takes the Bishop and Vhite wins through the advantage of being a Rook ahead. 8 THE ELEMENTS Again, in this position (No. 8) White has at his disposal a very strong attacking move, wiz 1.R-—KKt3! The Rook is attacking the Bishop, If the latter moves just anywhere, e.g. to Q7 or R5, then the Rook gives mate at Kt8. If, as is better, the Bishop moves to R3 or K2, then, in reply to 2. R — Kt8, ch, it can interpose at KB1 and cover the check. But now, as we No. 8 No. 9 a 2 oe 2 8 have seen before, White by the waiting move 3. R—R8 (or by 3.K—B6) wins the Bishop and the game: 3.... K-Q1; 4.R xB, ch. In position No. 9 White wins in a similar manner by 1. R- 8%, attacking the Bishop and at the same time threatening mute by R-B8. Black’s best move ve; is 1....B—Kt4 so that in reply Y Wy WY to 2. R-—B8, ch he can inter a Me A Wh pose the Bishop at Q1 a wey y Y YY . — Yi Y W/ UY ever, he loses it after a waitin Y ek) Y move by the Rook to Kt8 o Yj Yj Y R8 or after 3. K — Q6 since the “yy yj Oy Ce Ci YW) Black King must move and WA, Va, Wi . Vi relinquish the guard on the Wj Y Yy yy Bishop, which is then taken. oe Wi Yi Wa ‘e In position No. 10 the win- ning move is 1. R-R6. If the Bishop moves in the diagonal from R2 to Kt8 (ex to Kt3, where the Rook takes it), then 2. R —R8, mate. however, the Bishop moves to Ktl, 1.... B~Ktl, then axtoe' THE ELEMENTS 9 again we get 2. R-R8. By this move the Bishop is attacked, the Rook threatens to take it. The Bishop cannot escape for, if it were to move, the Black King would be in check and that must not be. A player must not make a move which places his King in check. So the Bishop is pinned—and its King cannot protect it (as he could do, if at Ql, by playing to Bl or B2). The Bishop cannot be guarded, it is taken, and White wins since later on he forces a mate. xx Please put the White King at White’s K2, the Black King at Black’s KB5 and the Black Queen—the Queens are the second largest pieces—at Black’s QKt6 (No. 11). The Queen combines the moves of the Rook and the Bishop, sie moves along ranks and files (like the Rook) or along dia- gonals (like the Bishop) and in each case for any number of squares. That is to say, she moves like the King, only for any number of squares. She is No. ll oe oe _ by far the strongest piece. To mate a lone King with her is not difficult. The King is forced to the edge and our King placed opposite to him. We have only to take care not to “‘stale- mate’ the enemy King. Stale- mate is reached when a player whose King is not in check has no move of any piece open to him. The game is then a draw. In the above position mate is brought about in the following way: 1....Q-B7,ch. This drives the King back to the first rank and almost opposite to the Black King. 2. K-BI, K-B6; 3.K-—K1, Q-B8, mate, or 3. K-Ktl, Q-KKt7, mate. If 2. K—KI, then 2... K-—B6; 3. K-B1, Q-KB7, Kt8, B8 or Q8, mate. aw “ \N a La * __ if in position No. 12 White moves his King to B6, Q6 or K6, then Black cannot move. The squares Ktl, Kt2, B2 and QI] are closed to him by the Queen and the square Q2 by the King. Therefore, while his King is not in check, Black has no move. Accordingly, it is stalemate and the game is a 10 THE ELEMENTS draw. White must avoid this mistake and bring about the mate as follows: 1.Q-R7, K-Q1; 2.K~-Q6. Always take up this so effective Opposition! The Black King can now move only to Bl or Kl. In the first case he is mated by 3. Q - QB7 or R8 (the square Kt2 is taken from the King by the Queen), in the second by 3. Q -K7. x¥ It is not difficult to bring about the mate of a lone King by Queen and King from any position, e.g. No. 13. No. 12 No. 13 ee YZ a. al Beat o ae ee aeatae ivi a @ We gradually force the White King anywhere on the edge of the board. First, however, we must bring our own King up to him. “- ~ Be ‘. ye a _" a ata — x a a te SALAS SA ~ “a. SN | ee K — Kt7 2. K -Q5 K — B6 3. K -K5 Q - KKt3 Thus we prevent the return of the King to the sixth rank, Q —- QKt3, with the same object, is also quite good. We wart to force the King to the first rank. No useless checks, how- ever. Let us systematically and gradually take one rank after another from the King. 4,K-B4 Q-R4 Thus we already take the fifth rank from him. 5. K -K4 Q -KkKt4 1 White’s Ist rank. In this and in other examples (unless otherwise stated) the ranks are designated from the point of view of White. + ll ng The final sition is something like the following (No. 14) or the position > have already met (No. 15): (Not 10.... K ~Q6? Q — B8 or Q7, mate. Q - KKtd Now the King must go to the second rank. The net is bei drawn closer. Q -R5 Q -R6 Q - Kt6é Q-Ri7 Thus the King is forced right to the edge. or K — Q7? on account of stalemate.) Q —- KKt7 11.K-Bl, Q-B8, K8, Kt8 or * * Bl Or 10.K~QI, Q-—-B7; QB7, mate. THE ELEMENTS By this quiet move in conjunction with the next we capture the fourth rank. 9. K —-K2 12.K ~Ql 1e mate could have been brought about in 9 moves, but the ne of play given is the most systematic and consequently the implest. 8. K — B2 11.K-K1 10s sei 10. K We gradually force the King to the edge. : The mate with Rook and King against a lone King is very milar. 7 o_o em .e 8 8 ao oe “_ 2 2 HHS a 2 \ \ \ N *. No. 15 Ge Geis be ee a a [ae oe a8 8 ee oan XN “eR & 2h No. 14 12 THE ELEMENTS The systematic mating process is as follows (No. 16): No. 16 1, K -Kt2 Here, too, we first advance our King. Here he has to move much more than in the mate with the Queen. Does K — Q5 2. K - B2 K —-K5 3. R -Kt5 White takes the fifth rank from the King whom he wants to drive to the first. Bi xkes K -—Q5 4.K -Kt3 Above all, no useless checks. Yee K —K5 5. K —-B3 K — Bd 6. K —-Q3 K —Kt5 7.K-—K3 K — Kté6! If 7....K —R5, then White after 8. K -B3!, K-R6 has go} the Opposition and plays 9. R —R5, mate. 8. R — Kt5, ch When the Kings are in Opposition, a check is in place, for i drives the King a file or a rank—in this case a file—nearer t the edge. Bi des K — R5 THE ELEMENTS 13 Attacking the Rook—a point the beginner must not overlook. 9. K —- B4 K — R6 10. K ~ B3! K — R77! If 10...K —R5, then 11. R-QR5, KB65 or K5, etc., K - R6; 12. R - R65, mate. 11. R—Kt8, Kt6 or Kt7 Not 11. R-Kt2, ch, K~R8; 12. K—B2 or Kt3 because of stalemate. On the other hand, the continuation 11. R — R5, ch, K -Kt8; 12. R -R8, R7 or R6, etc., K —B8; 13. R-Rl, mate is just as quick as that following 11. R - Kt8, viz.: ly Beare K — R8! If 11....K —R6, then 12. R —R8, mate. 12. K — B2 K —R7 13. R — R8, mate. * ¥ The struggle between Queen and Rook is very attractive. Once the Rook is separated from its King it is lost, since the Queen checks and at the same time attacks the Rook. Thus eal there is a double attack. Occa- WY Y/, J Y sionally this double attack . aa: a occurs on the first move, as in V we a a example No. 17: 1. Q—RS, ch. The Queen is oe . — . Via Ui, ah <s wr ee — attacking King and Rook. yy Y (i Mid Wa, a move than 1.... K -Ktl, upon which the Queen takes the Queen would attack both pieces and so capture the Rook, which, since White’s King and Queen are both attacking Since Black must get his King out of check, he has no other WY Y/ Y/ Mea Rook (2. Q xR, ch). Wi Wi Vi Vi By 1.Q-Q7,ch also the Black’s KKt2, cannot interpose there. The Queen would capture it and give mate. 14 ‘THE ELEMENTS In example No. 18 also the double attack occurs at once: By 1.Q-K4, ch White wins the Rook. To be sure, it can No. 19 ane a ee a _ “ae on ns ae ate ne ss interpose at Kt3 and give check but the Queen, guarded by the King, takes it with check and, after K — Rl, mates at Kt7. ¥ In position No. 19 the capture is a difficult and longer pro- blem but one which the beginner can now understand. The play is: 1. Q — K4, ch If the King moves to R1, then the double attack 2. Q — R4, ch follows and the Rook is lost. If the King moves to R3, then the same Queen move gives mate. Therefore, the King must move to Ktl. anes K ~ Ktl 2. Q — B4, ch! This check is decisive since 2....K-—B1? is followed by 3. Q—-B8, mate. If, instead, the King moves on to the Rook’s file at Rl or R2, then the double attack 3.Q-—R4, ch wins the Rook. No. 20 is a very pretty piece of play: 1. Q - K4, ch K —RIl or Ktl THE ELEMENTS 15 Not K -—R3 because of 2. Q —R4, mate. 2. Q —R8, ch R-Ktl If, instead, 2.... K -R2 (forced after 1.... K —Ktl), then the double attack 3. Q ~R7, ch follows and White wins the Rook. 3. Q-KRI, mate. A very surprising and beautiful mate. In endeavouring to No. 20 Moy aa Vi Bee ae Y/ os T Cyl fll escape, the Rook has taken from the King the flight-square Ktl. * In position No. 21 White must try to check at Q8. 1.Q-R865, ch K —Ktl 2. Q —Q5, ch K — R2! After 2....K—Rl the double attack 3.Q-Q8, ch follows immediately. If, instead, 2....K —Bl?, then the same Queen move gives mate. 3. Q — Q3, ch K — Ktl or Rl If 3.... K—R3, then 4. Q-—R3 or Kt6, mate. 4. Q — Q8, ch, winning the Rook. In position No. 22 White must aim at a check at his KKtl or QKts. 1. Q — K4, ch K — Ktl 16 THE ELEMENTS 1.... K — R3 is out of the question on account of 2. Q -—R4, Rl or Kt6, mate. If 1....K —Rl, then the desired check at KKtl is brought about by 2.Q-Rl1, ch, K—Ktl!; 3. Q—Ktl, ch. If, however, after 2.Q-Rl1,ch, the Rook interposes No. 22 (2... R-R2?), then by 3.Q-R8 White gives a beautiful mate, a companion to that in No. 20. 2. Q — Q5, ch K —RI or R2 If 2.... K—Bl?, then 3. Q —Q8, mate. 3.Q-Rl, ch K -Ktl If 3.... RR —R2, then 4. Q —R8, mate. 4,Q-Ktl, ch, winning the Rook. From these very instructive lines of play we see clearly the great strength of the Queen. Now, please, put the White King at White’s K3, two White pawns—they are the smallest of the men? and each player has eight of them—at White’s K4 and KB4, and the Black King at Black’s K8. The pawns are the least valuable of the men, but, if any pawn reaches the last rank (i.e. its owner’s 8th rank), it is exchanged for any piece he likes—of the same colour —with the exception of the King. Thus each side could have 1 Though occasionally used loosely, the word “piece’’ strictly is applied to only King, Queen, Rook, Bishop or Knight. A player’s men consist of pieces and pawns. 20 THE ELEMENTS The pawn advances and at the same time unmasks the White Bishop, opens for it a line of attack, enables it to check. The Black King can no longer move to Kt] since that square is taken from him by the pawn. The only move is 4.... B —Kt2, after which White can mate in several ways—(1) by 5. B x B, mate (the White Bishop is guarded by the King and cannot be cap- tured), and (2) by 5. P—B8 (Q), mate (the Queen cannot be taken by the Bishop since the Black King would then be in check to White’s Bishop—and this placing one’s King in check is not permissible). Instead of a Queen, White could choose a Rook and still give mate: 5. P —- B8 (R), mate. But the move 3....K—RI is faulty. Instead of this, the Bishop can—and must—move, eg. 3...B—K2. If White takes the Bishop, Black is stalemated. For the King cannot move to Bl because the White pawn guards that square, nor to R1 because of the White Bishop. Nor can the pawn move But White need not capture the Bishop. A much stronger line is; 4.P-—B7,ch, K-Bl1 (the pawn is guarded by the King, therefore cannot be taken), 5.B-—Kt7, mate. The Black King cannot move to K1 since the pawn takes that square from it, the square K2 is occupied by Black’s own Bishop, while the White Bishop is guarded by its King and therefore cannot be taken. But on his third move Black can play the Bishop to B4, Kt6 or R6. (If it goes to Q3, White’s Bishop can take it, but, even better, White can play 4. P-B7, ch, K-BI, 5. B xB, mate.) If 3....B-—B4, Kt5 or R6, then 4.P-—B7,ch, K-BI; 5. B—Kt7, ch, K —K2 (the only move), and now the pawn, guarded by the Bishop, can queen, 6. P—-B8 (Q), ch, and White wins quite easily. Black can, instead, play 3...B-—Kt2. If White takes the Bishop, 4. Px B?, then Black is stalemated. But, instead, White plays 4.P-B7,ch, K-Bl (if 4... K-—R1, we again geteither 5. B x B, mate, 5. P- B8 (Q), mate, or 5. P — B8 (R), mate); 5. B-Q6, mate. Obviously, White can also win by 5. BxB, ch but, naturally, to mate at once is more precise. Finally, we must consider (after 1.B-—K5,ch, K-Ktl; 2.P-B5, P—K3; 3. P-B6) the move 3....B-—R3. White could simply take the Bishop and would then win. More pre- cise, however (as after 3.... B—Q3), is 4. P—B7, ch, K-Bl; 5. B — Q6, mate. ¢ THE ELEMENTS 21 In position No. 26 White has the right idea—to obtain a “passed” pawn. Thus we describe a pawn which has no oppos- ing pawn in front of it, either in the file in which it stands or in either of the adjacent files, and which, therefore, has the best possible chance of becoming a Queen. White wants to play P+.B3 and P-Kt4. He does this: 1.P-—B3, P-Bd!; 2:\P ~Kt4. Black replies by capturing the pawn in the Knight’s file and placing his own at White’s QKt3. This is the taking ““@n passant” (t.e. in passing) as it is called. 2....PxP, e.p. (“e.p.” stands for ‘‘en passant’). The pawn which was at Ke in playing in one move to Kt4, has passed over the Sqtare Kt3 which is in the line of action of Black’s pawn at B5. No. 26 No 27 The Black pawn can capture the White just as if the latter had moved only one square, 1¢. to Kt3. However, this capture, if made, must be made immediately, ie. Black cannot make another move and then at a subsequent turn to play capture the pawn en passant. has not thought of this capture and as a punishment ‘his forgetfulness loses the game since Black’s passed pawn Kt6 queens in two moves. White’s idea is correct but his ewution of it faulty. The plan of creating a passed pawn usb be carried out in the following way: 1. P-Kt3, 2. P-B3 3. P—Kt4. * Nps , No. 27 the forces are equal but Black is suffering Meiee a disadvantage. His pawns are “doubled”. Thus we de- ie ie two pawns of the same colour standing in the same file. 22 THE ELEMENTS Three such pawns we call “trebled” pawns. Here we ca:, clearly see the disadvantage of doubled pawns. They can bx held up by a single opposing pawn. This would not be the case if the pawn at QKt3 were at QB2. Then Black by play- ing P-B3 (or, provided it were a good move, P — B4) could obtain a passed pawn. As matters are, however, White 18 virtually a pawn (the one at his Kt3) to the good and on this he is able to base a winning plan. He plays to win the doubled pawns and then queen his Queen’s Knight’s pawn. In tlie meantime Black is occupied in capturing the pawn at Kt3 and thus he is unable to defeat White’s plan. The play is: 1.K-K4 K — Kté 2. K —-Q5 KxP 3. K —Q6 Naturally, the King cannot move to B5d or B6. 3 eee K — B5 4.K -B7 K —-K4 5. K xeither P K — Q3 6.K xP K — Q2 7. K-—R7 The White King now commands the squares Kt6, Kt7 and Kt& which the pawn has to occupy, and so makes its journey quite ae K -B2 8. P — Kt6, ch K - Bl 9. P —~Kt7, ch, followed by 10. P—Kt8 (Q). If, in reply to 1. K-—K4, Black plays 1.... K-B3, then 2. K —Q5, K-K2. In this way the Black King has shut the White off from the pawns. But he is now drawn off by the advance of the passed pawn: 3. P —- Kt4 (K — K5 also is good), K — Q2; 4. P -Kt5, K -K2; 5. P -Kt6, K —- B3 (if 5....K ~ Q2, then 6. P—Kt7 and the pawn queens); 6.K —Q6, KP; 7. K -B7, K —-B3; 8. K xeither P, K-K2; 9. K xP, K-QIL; 10. K —- R7 and the pawn queens without hindrance. In position No. 28 neither pawn can be prevented from a 1.P-Kt6 P-R6 2.P—Kt7 P-R7 3. P—Kt8(Q) P — R8(Q) bo THE ELEMENTS 3 Usually the ending Queen v. Queen results in a draw, but here No. 28 No. 29 a a | ty Wh Wo CO ty yt WH a ays CB oo tp We CW. “wy gy - i yy Oo WY won a, _ la A yyy Yi, L & ty “ye th UGG GRY ay ty 3 YUipy is iY GIYY % YY y Wed fafa by ty yy tite ty WHA iy Vit, Wp We =<Fy Gi, YLY, ty Yh “gto hh Yi Yt yy White has at his disposal a move which at once decides the game in his favour: 4. Q — Rs, ch! K — anywhere 5. Q x Q, and White wins. In position No. 29 each player, naturally, is playing to push on his pawn and change it into a Queen. 1. P-B6 P—K5 2.P—B7 P-K6 3. P— B8 (Q) P-K7 Black is a move too late. Naturally, White must not grant his opponent a moment’s respite in which to push the pawn home. The following is the very interesting winning plan. By a suc- cession of checks and by attacks on the pawn White seeks to drive the Black King in front of it, t.e. to K8. Then—and only then—has White time to move his King towards the scene of action. After many repetitions of this manwuvre, the White King can at length play a decisive part. The ideal position for iar White must all the time be aiming is either No. 30 or No. 31. In these positions, in order not to relinquish his guard on the pawn, the King must move in front of it, t.e. to K8. 24 THE ELEMENTS After the White pawn has queened (in No. 29) the game pro- ceeds as follows: 4. Q —KB5, ch White could, instead, continue with 4. Q—B2, for after that move the pawn would be prevented from going forward by the No. 30 BOT A A, No. 31 \\ \ \ SS 4 ‘i, fi a_i BL, “, Y Whe Z Yt VW 17 fact that, if it did so, the King would be in check. The pawn would be pinned. ere K — Kt7 5.Q—-K4orKi4,ch K-B7 Naturally, the King must move so that he guards the pawn. 6. Q — B4, ch 7.Q-K3! K - Kt7 Don’t always check! This direct attack on the pawn is very effective and leads immediately to one of the ideal positions. Ser 8. Q-B3, ch K - B8 Kk —- K8 Thus the first stage is accomplished. Now the White King can approach. 9. K — B6 K — Q7! K — Q8 would be bad, for the pawn, being then pinned, would be unable to advance and so White’s King could at once make another move. 10. Q — B2 THE ELEMENTS 25 There is no need always to check. A move which pins the pawn is just as effective. 10. .... K — Q8 K —Q6 would be bad, for White would occupy the queening square by Q — K1! and then, after bringing up the King, would win easily. Now, after 10.... K -Q8, White has again to aim at one of the ideal positions. 11. Q — Q4, ch K — B7 12. Q —- K3! K — Q8 13. Q — Q3, ch K —-K8 Now, again, White’s King can move. 14. K -Q5 K —- B7 K —B8 would be faulty, as the pawn would be pinned (ef. move 9). 15. Q — Q2 K — B8 16. Q — B4, ch K — Kt7 17. Q — K3! K—BS8 18. Q — B3, ch K —K8 19. K —-K4 Now the White King is near enough to co-operate. 19. .... K —Q7 20. Q — Q3, ch K —-K8 21. K—-B3 Now the pawn is doubly attacked and will be captured. The play proceeds: y 4 are K —B8 22. Q x P, ch K — Kt8 23. Q — Kt2, mate. If the advanced pawn is on either of the Bishops’ or Rooks’ files, then the result is quite different. In No. 32, if it were Black’s move, he would occupy the queen- ing square by Q-BI! and win. But suppose, instead, it is White’s turn to play. 1.K —-Kt8 Q — Kt3, ch 26 THE ELEMENTS The ideal position has been reached. 2. K—R8 QxP White is stalemated and the game a draw. Similarly, if the pawn is on one of the Rooks’ files, as in position No. 33: No. 32 ie ys Y td, ty, Y “yet WH yif”™'y ‘ Uji rye Y Yip ed Mh yy fill lla YY Z Ws Y, 7 ¢ Z Vy 4° bh Mh “bh, Yip 1. Q -—Kt4, ch K — B7 2. Q-—R3 K — Kt8 3. Q — Kt3, ch The ideal position. Eee K —-R8 4. K -B5 Black is stalemated. Tf, however, the weaker side has a pawn, this prevents stale- mate, and the Queen often wins. In No. 34 the play is: er Q —Kt4, ch 2. K —B7 Q -R3 3. K —-Kt8 Q — Kt3, ch The ideal] position. 4.K—-R8 Q — B2! 5. P— R4 Q — Bl, mate, THE ELEMENTS 27 Here the Queen can give mate on her own since White’s King is deprived of the square R7 by White’s own pawn. Usually, to give mate the Queen needs the aid of the King or of some other man on her own side. If the pawn is on the sixth rank, the win with the Queen is quite simple. Naturally, in position No. 35 White must allow his opponent no time for the move P—R7. By continually checking with the Queen he must bring her nearer and nearer to the opposing No. 34 No. 35 mellup a Ys Yee) YUU, GYLA YY VILE ee ye Ye Yu; Lp ye YY oy Cay, Cia Cy Mia ayy lay yy A 4, Z SHIGE tile Wa Wa Vi Va WV ty Y “Hd Un Wo ‘ty its . yay. Yj, Ye Yee Yi Uy, eae 0” wa weg wo wy thy LAs, tty 4 tgs Uy ty ty s ass ty UYfy King until she is in a position to make the decisive move, which -——by analogy with the play in the previous examples—can be none other than Q — Kt4, ch. 1. Q — Kt8, ch K — B7 2. Q — B7, ch K — Kt7 3. Q — Kt6, ch K —- B7 4. Q — B5, ch K —- Kt7 5. Q —Kt4, ch K —R7 Now White makes a waiting move. 6. K —Q3 Now the Black King has to move to R8—Zugzwang (see p. 5) —and give up guarding the pawn—which then is captured. Geis K —R8 7.Q~xP, ch K — Kt8 28 THE ELEMENTS And now Caution! White can let victory slip out of his grasp at the eleventh hour. If he moves K — K2 or K — K3?, Black is stalemated. The right line of play is: 8. K —- Q2 K —-B7 9.Q-Kt4 Q - R2, ch, would be bad since it would let the Black King escape into the open (K — B6, etc.). K —B8 K —K8 11. Q — Ktl or K2, mate. Of all the pieces the Knight has the most complicated move. (The Knight is the piece with the horse’s head.) The Knight moves: either two squares forward and one sideways or one forward and two sideways or two backward and one sideways or one backward and two sideways. Diagram No. 36 shows the squares to which a Knight can move from Black’s K5. It jumps No 36 VY ti, Yo 4 G/F Y yy over the intervening squares and pieces en route. You should practise industri- ously all the possible Knight moves over the entire board. Startling double attacks are the Knight’s speciality. In position No. 37 Black has a Queen against a Knight— le tH YY Y ZY o7 Ys Y Y, the Queen is worth as much as two Rooks or three minor pieces (the name we give to Bishops and Knights)—and yet, if it is White’s turn to move, he can save the game. The Knight moves from B2 to K4. In this way he attacks the King and checks (one forward and two sideways). At the same time, however, he is attacking the Queen (two forward THE ELEMENTS 29 and one sideways). The King must save himself—and the Queen is lost. * x In position No. 38 White plays 1.R-QBI, attacking the Knight. Black answers with 1.... Kt -K7, ch, attacking No. 37 No. 38 Ve AG Wy Za YU 4, Ae uz iA Yb. 4 4 WY NY NS LY NS % SS 8 \ x Wo > Ui: Gy ¢ “4 YW w Z NY SS Sy \ S wN 7 YUL 4 o 2 4, YES IPS, is oe “ toy yg tuys WH” tepe Gates G00 os uy, if ie, Gs, “i 4 AZ % 2g : Gols King and Rook at the same time (one forward and two side- ways), and so wins the Rook. White has made a frightful blunder of which Black has taken advantage. x <N \N N ~ N > * % Already, in position No. 25, we have had an example of “‘discovered”’ check. This is a check given not by the piece that is moved but by another which is unmasked by that move. But the piece moved may also give check and then we have a case of ‘‘double’”’ check. LLL, In position No. 39, if White’s Ae Rook moves, it will unmask Z an attack on the King by || ¥% the Bishop at White’s QKt2. op” agp, Now the Rook can so move |W 4 that it too will attack the King, WY yg v.e. to KR3 or B8. In each 144% 44% YF ° YY: Z G Uy case White gives a double Aaa a as check. In reply to a double fa 4 [ag 2 ig : Z check, the King attacked has Yj Yj Uy always to move. The double 30 THE ELEMENTS attack cannot be warded off by the interposition of a man or by a capture. If the Bishop alone were giving check, the Knight could take it or the Rook could interpose at KKt2. If the Rook alone were giving check, either at KR3 or B8, Black’s Bishop could take it. Against a double attack on the King neither capture nor interposition avails since by each of those methods only one attack would be parried, one check ended. Only a move by the King, if such be possible, parries both attacks. In reply to 1. R—R3, ch?, Black must play 1.... K —Ktl; in reply to the further check 2. R~R8, ch, the King has still a way of escape via B2. On the other hand, after 1. R-—B8, ch!, K-—R2, White can continue the attack with 2. R —R8, ch,—and that move gives mate, since the square KKt3 is occupied by the Black pawn. If the pawn were at KR2, instead of at KKt3, then 1. R - B8 would mate at once. This demonstrates how dangerous a double check may be. xk * In No. 40 White is a Rook and two pawns to the bad. However, he saves himself by giving a “perpetual” check: 1.Q-B8, ch, K—R2; 2.Q-3B7, ch, K-Rl1; 3. Q-—B8, ch, No. 40 No. 41 Ybths Yur % ty ey a Y peng syle LG Z Yr, Ue Le Yelitle Ys Oates tp 4 YY Hity “ee of Ye tht CEG afte tee OMI “WY ry Vo te SS Le f iy Gir is ey Ube : Ne Lae S208 NY Z ye %s, A v4 ore Zc Ole ne gerne ? ao ee Wl ie Z wy 4 4 Bre 4s Lid GZ 4 te ULbois the fh Z % SLO", *, 4 4 Lye : of a fee Wf O Me, yo Val “, 3 Yes ‘ We ee, : we * Se 2 Yh te Yegy : UY (Aa Wild, es Ye ff let Uae, is : wees Z Yeo g Delta Yo: y Yy Oo EM, ts Yi typ 3 g VLOG ELL o Hatt if a 7 Wyte *, 4 thas, yr thew), SY J “ne ¢ A é Zee “ 7 ad % Wher? LA ta a4 Bee 4 ES Laon, Wy Whi Wl4. WHE etc. Since Black cannot escape from this perpetual check, the game must be abandoned as a draw. In No. 41 White plays 1.R xR and naturally Black replies THE ELEMENTS 31 with 1....R xR. Such a reciprocal taking of men of equal value is called an exchange.! Similarly, 2.P xP, PxP. The beginner must play through these examples over and over again until he has firmly established in his mind the elements of the game. Only then should he proceed further. A Sort SUMMARY OF THE ELEMENTS The chess-board is a square containing 64 smaller squares, alternately white and black. On this board the 32 men are set out, 16 white and 16 black. They represent two armies that are to engage in battle. The board is so placed that each player has a white square at his right-hand corner. Each army consists of cight pieces * or officers and cight pawns The pieces on each side are a King, a Queen, two Rooks, two Bishops and two Knights. The pieces on each side are set out in the first row and the pawns in the second, as in diagram No. 42. The Kings stand opposite to each other and so do the Queens. The White King is on a black square, the Black King on a white, the White Queen is on a white square, the Black Queen on a black. The pieces on Kae Si ‘af a 4 the King’s side are called the ZL OB @ £. ~ fl King’s Bishop, King’s Knight and King’s Rook, those on the Queen’s side Queen’s Bishop, Queen’s Knight and Queen’s Rook. The pawns are named after the pieces which stand behind them, e.g. King’s pawn, Queen’s pawn (these two pawns in each army are frequently spoken of as centre pawns), King’s Bishop’s pawn, King’s Knight’s pawn, etc. When a pawn makes a capture, it changes its file and its name, e.g. White’s King’s Rook’s pawn after making a capture would become a King’s Knight’s No 42 katue tae #14 catins wz Vi iy Met tt Uj Vy t Not to be confused with ‘‘the Exchange” which we shall meet later (seo p. 35). 2 See note on p. 16. 32 THE ELEMENTS pawn. If there is already a White pawn in the King’s Knight’s file, then the two pawns have to be distinguished by writing down in brackets the squares on which they are standing, e.g. P(Kt2) or P(Kt3). Bach side moves in turn, White playing first. The pieces may move in their various ways either forward or backward until they come to a square occupied by a man of either side. They cannot jump over it—the exception of the Knight has already been mentioned—nor, if the man is of their own colour, can they occupy that square. They can take an opposing piece or pawn which stands in their linc of action by removing it from the board and assuming its place. Only the King cannot be taken. The Rook moves along the files or ranks, the Bishop along the diagonals. One Bishop of each side moves on the white squares, the other on the black. The Queen moves along ranks, files or diagonals. The King moves like the Queen but only one square at a time. The Knight moves two squares forward and one sideways or one forward and two sideways, and backward in the same way. The King may not move to a square where it is attacked by an enemy man. The pawn moves only in a forward direction, one square atatime. It cannot go backward. From its original position each pawn can, if so desired, move two squares. The pawn captures diagonally, to right or to left, within a range of one square. Ifa pawn by making an initial move of two squares comes alongside of an enemy pawn—which thus could have taken it if it had advanced only one square—then it can be taken as if it had advanced only that one square (taking en passant). This, if done, must be done at once. If a pawn has advanced as far as the eighth rank, then it is exchanged for any piece of the same colour with the exception of the King. Thus each side could have two, three, or even more Queens, three or more Knights, etc. If a man so moves that an opposing man stands in its line of attack, the latter is said to be attacked. If this man attacked is the King, then the attacking man is said to give check—and it is customary to say “check”. The player whose King is in check must in all circumstances and at once do something to ward off this attack. He may either (1) take the attacking man, (2) interrupt its line of action by interposing one of his own men, or (3) niove the King out of check. If a check is from a Knight or pawn, interposition is impossible. (A check may THE ELEMENTS 33 also be given by opening a previously closed line of action of a piece. This is the “discovered” check, The man moved may itself also give check, then we get a “‘double” check. In reply to a double check the King attacked always has to move.) If the King can in no way be got out of check, he is checkmated and his side has lost the game. However, most games are not played right up to mate but given up (resigned) when one player realises that his opponent has too great a superiority in force or sees from other considerations that a lost game is inevitable. If, without his King being in check, a player on his turn to move cannot move anything, then he is stalemated and the game is drawn. A game is also drawn if there are not enough pieces available to force a mate or if the two players bring about the same position three times.! A special case of this last is the perpetual check. Further, the game is drawn if one player, having a sufficient superiority in force to bring avout a win (e.g. Bishop and Knight against a King) cannot bring abcut the mate in 50 moves (50 by each player), the counting of which has been demanded by his opponent. In- deed, either player can claim a draw if in the course of any 50 consecutive moves (50 by each player), the counting of which he has previously demanded, neither a man is taken nor a pawn moved. The count begins again after each capture or each pawn move. Finally, often a game is abandoned as a draw at the suggestion of one of the players who sees that a win for either side is improbable. YASTLING Once in each game each player may make a combined move- ment with the King and one Rook. The object of this move- ment is to bring the Rook into play and the King into a position of safety. This is “‘castling’. The two pieces must be on their original squares. Castling is effected by moving the King two squares towards the Rook and then moving the Rook over the King and placing it on the adjacent square in the rank. Castling may be carried out on the King’s or the Queen’s side. Castling on the King’s side is designated by Castles (KR) and on the Queen’s side by Castles (QR). [Castles (KR) is some- times written as O —O, Castles (QR) as O-O-O.] 1 Provided that each time the position is reached, the same player has the ‘urn to move. This is mentioned on p. 37. D 34 THE ELEMENTS In the following position White has castled on the King’s side and Black on the Queen’s (No. 43). Castling is permissible only under the following conditions: (1) There must be nothing between the King and the Rook. (2) Neither of these pieces must previously have moved. (3) The King must not at the moment be in check nor, in castling, may he pass over or finish up on a square attacked by one of the enemy men. In this position (No. 44) neither White nor Black may castle. White may not castle on the King’s side since the King would thus move into check from the Bishop at Black’s QR2. He may not castle on the Queen’s side for the King would pass over his Q1] which is attacked by the Bishop at Black’s KR4. Black may not castle on the King’s side for the King would pass over his KBI which is attacked by the Bishop at White’s QK3. He cannot castle on the Queen's side since there is a piece between the King and the Queen’s Rook A Frew Common CuEss TreRMS Sacrifice: The placing of a piece where you know it can be taken because you hope to gain some advantage thereby. Doubled pauns: Two pawns of the same colour in the same file. Trebled pauns Three pawns of the same colour in the same file. Isolated pawn: We call a pawn “‘isolated’’ when there is no pawn of the same colour in either of the adjacent files. In contrast to this, we have, of course: THE ELEMENTS 35 United pawns: Pawns of the same colour in adjacent files and in contact with each other. Backward pawn: A pawn which has remained behind the pawns in adjacent files. Passed pawn: A pawn which on its way to the eighth rank has no opposing pawn in front of it in either the file in which it stands or the adjacent files. To guard: So to move a man that it can retake an opposing man in the event of the latter making a capture. If the men so captured are of equal value, this process of capture and recapture is called “exchanging”’. Opposition: The position of the Kings when they are the shortest possible distance from one another. A fork: The attack of a pawn or Knight on two men at once. Minor pieces: The Bishop and Knight, in contrast to the Queen and Rook. These latter are the Major pieces. Gambit: The word (from the Italian “Dare a gambetta’— to thrust out a leg) is the name given to an Opening in which a man—generally a pawn — is sacrificed. Tempo: A move in the sense of time, the time value of a move. Zugzuwang: Disagreeable obligation to move —since by so doing the position is weakened. The Kachange: (see next paragraph). * ¥ THe RELATIVE VALURS oF THE MEN The Queen is worth as muchas two Rooks or three minor pieces. The Rook is more valuable than a minor piece. The difference in value we call “the Exchange”. Thus when exchanging one of our minor pieces for a Rook, we are said to win the Harchange. T'wo minor pieces are more valuable than a Rook. Knight and Bishop are of the same value. Mach is worth roughly 3 pawns. This table of values 1s set out only for beginners and not very advanced players. It will be modified later on in the book. x ¥ ABBREVIATIONS K = King (or King’s), Q = Queen (or Queen’s), R =- Rook (or Rook's), B= Bishop (or Bishop’s), Kt = Knight (or Knight's), P=pawn. 1 This word is used very frequently in this book. 36 THE ELEMENTS i 9 33 $6 99 —” signifies “to”, “x” signifies ‘‘takes’, “‘ch’’ signifies “check” and “‘e.p.”’ signifies ‘en passant’. O-O is sometimes used for Castles (KR), O-O-O for Castles (QR). ! indicates a good, ? a bad (or inferior) move. * % THE NOTATION The beginner will by now be familiar with the notation em- ployed to describe the moves. There are, however, some points which need mention. Occasionally, to avoid ambiguity in recording a move, certain additions have to be made. These are best explained by the use of examples. Let us suppose that either of a player’s Rooks can move to his K1 and that his Queen’s Rook does so. If it is clear from the position that it is the Queen’s Rook, the move would be recorded as QR -—K1. But now suppose the Rooks are at Q8 and Q2 and either can move to Q4. If it is not clear which is the Queen’s and which the King’s Rook-— it probably will not be - then the Rook which moves is in- dicated by the insertion in brackets after the “R” of the name of the square from which it moved, e.g. R(Q8) -Q4. Similarly, K1(B4) -Q3, R(KKt7) —-QB7, ete. In the same way let us suppose that a White Rook could take either of two pawns standing at White’s K7 and K4. If it takes the first, the move is recorded as R x P(K7); if the second, R x P(K4). The description in brackets, whether of the man moved or the man captured, is always given from the point of view of the player making the move. On the other hand, the description of a move can sometimes be simplified. Suppose a player has a Knight at his QKt3 and pawns at his QKt2 and KKt2. If he moves the latter to KKt4, it is unnecessary, in recording the move, to specify P- KKt4 since P —QKt4 is impossible. Therefore P — Kt4 is sufficient. Similarly, suppose that either Kt—KKt5 = or Kt - QKt5 can be played and the first move gives check. If the second move is made, it is unnecessary to describe it as Kt --QKt5. Kt —Kt5 is sufficient, the absence of the “ch” showing that the move is not to KKt5.4 * * 1 In tho earlier part of this book some of the moves could have been denoted more simply. The full description has been given when sim- plification has seemed likely to puzzle the beginner. THE ELEMENTS 37 THe Most ImMporrTant LAWS OF THE GAME In the first game between two players the right to move first is decided by lot, afterwards it alternates. The player to move first takes the White men. Ifa player touches a man, he must, if possible, move it. If a player desires merely to adjust the position of a man, he must first say “J’adoube”’ (I adjust). df the same position occurs three times in a game, with the same player’s turn to move, he may, but before making a move, claim a draw. Also, if in an end-game a player cannot bring about a mate inside 50 moves (50 by each player), the game is drawn, but his opponent must have demanded the count at the beginning of that end-game (or phase of the end-game). Further, either player has the right to abandon a game as drawn if in the course of any 50 consecutive moves (50 by each player) no man has been taken and no pawn moved. He must, how- ever, have demanded this earlier. If a player makes a move not permitted by the rules of the game or if he touches either an enemy man which cannot be taken or one of his own which cannot be moved, then until recently there was a rule that as a penalty he must move his King (but not castle). If the King could not move, then the touching of the man entailed no penalty. This rule was altered a few years ago—and rightly so. Now the illegal move must be retracted and the man touched must, whenever possible, be moved (if his own) or captured (if his opponent’s). If, however, he can neither move his own man nor capture his opponent’s, there is no penalty— only the illegal move must be retracted. If in a tournament a player whose turn it is to move at the adjournment, in re- cording the move he intends to make, writes down an illegal, illegible or ambiguous move, then the game is counted as a loss for him. kkkk PART 2 THE END-GAME Game and End-Game—which merge into one another without any sharp line of demarcation. Not all games go as far as the end-game. Many are brought to a conclusion in the middle game by a mate or a resignation. If by captures or exchanges most of the pieces have been removed from the board, then the end-game is reached. Here the problem is either to torce a mate by means of a superiority in force or to queen a pawn and thus gain this decisive superiority. Up to the present we have been occupied only with end-games, and now we are stil] proceeding with them but in a more systematic way. We are considering the end-game first because it is the simplest part of the game. Naturally, it 15 simpler to concern oneself with a few pieces than with 32 —and the begmner by so doing will acquire a clearer concep- tion of their powers \ GAME of chess consists of three phases— Opening, Middle No 45 * QUEEN 7. QUEEN This end-game usually re- sults ina draw. Occasionally, however, Queen can win against Queen it her King can advance into Opposition and so threaten a mate. Thus in No 45: ] P-Kta(Q), P R&(Q), 2.Q-R2, ch, K—B8! af K —Q8, then, naturally, the Queen is lost), 3. Q—Ktl, ch, K —Kt7; 4.Q B2,ch, K-R6, 5.Q-K3, ch, K-—Kt7! af K~R7?2, then Q-—Kt3, mate, or, if K—R5?’, then Q-R7, mate); 6. Q- Q2, ch'!, K-—Kt8 (if 6... K-— R62, then 7. Q ~Kt4, ch, K~R7, 8. Q-Kt3, mate), 7.K—-—Kt3! and the mate threatened by either Q-B2 or Q—QI1 can be avoided only by the sacrifice of the Queen. (In reply to 7.... Q — B6, ch, 38 THE END-GAME 39 however, the Queen must not take because of stale- mate.) se In an end-game with Queens and pawns—a Queen end-game —an extra pawn, even if far advanced, is seldom sufficient to force a win. On account of the numerous checks to which the King of the stronger side is exposed a draw is very probable. However, a superiority of two . - No. 46 pawns is decisive. The end- game Queen and minor piece v. Queen results in a win only in exceptional circumstances. * QUEEN v. RooK This end-game is not easy. You force the opposing King to the edge of the board, bring up your own King and then by Zugzwang (see p 35) force the Rook to leave its King. The Rook is then captured by a series of checks _In No. 46 the play is 1.K-B4, R-Kt3, 2.Q-K7,ch, K-Ktl, 3.K-B5, R-Kt2, 4. Q-K8, ch, K—R2, 5 K-B6._ In this position Black is in Zugzwang and the Rook must leave its King — If 5. K-—-R3, then the Rook would at once be lost by 6. Q —- KB8 or 6.Q—R8, ch, R-R2, 7.Q- KKts. (If 7. R-B2, ch, then &§ K xR! and not 8.Q~xR because of stalemate. This danger must always be guarded against, once your King has reached the sixth rank.) If in the position arrived at after 5. K — B6 it were White’s turn to move, then he could sacrifice a tempo (see p 35) by the manoeuvre Q-—K4, ch, Q-RS,ch and Q-K8, thus bringing about the same position but with Black to move, ve. 6.Q-—K4, ch, K-—Ktl or Rl, 7.Q-—R4,ch, K- R2, 8 Q-Ks _ The essential feature of such a waiting manceuvre is that the player takes three moves over a journey for which only two are really necessary. He throws away a move or a tempo. In this position, for example, the Queen could have done the journey from K8 to K8 in two moves, viz. Q — K4, ch, 40 THE END-GAME and Q-K8. She took three and lost atempo. (Such waiting moves are not infrequently made by the King, who in doing so makes a triangular movement as the Queen has done here.) As soon as the Rook is away from its King, it is won by a suc- cession of checks, as we have previously seen (Nos. 17 to 22). ¥% The end-game Queen v. Rook and pawn very rarely occurs in actual play. Generally it 1sadraw. The end-games Queen v. Rook and Bishop (or Knight) and Queen v. two minor pieces never occur in actual play. * ¥ Bisnorp AND KNIGHT v. KING This mate 1s extremely difficult as these two pieces do not lend themselves to harmonious co-operation. But it must be Yj, known by every player since : it occurs fairly frequently, un- like the end-game with two Bishops which practically never occurs. I hope, by means of the method given here, to have made the ending Bishop and Knight » King so simple that any player can master it The final position is shown in No, 47 Thus mate 1s possible only on a corner square of the same colour as those on which the Bishop moves. No 47 * In No. 48 the first task is to force the King to the edge. 1. Kt —Kt3 K — Q3 2. K —Kt5 Naturally the King plays a very important part. Dey sales K — Q4 3. B — B7, ch K — Q3 4. B-B4 K —- K4 THE END-GAME 41 Naturally the King stays in the middle of the board as long as possible and then makes for a corner square which is unsuitable No. 48 ; /GV« Gy Ut Ae Yl y ; Vl te CV yy YZ 7 “W/ 4 a Me, YH Ze ty, =U YY Ma W/ “7 Y to White’s purpose, 7.e. in this case a black one. 5. K-B5 6. K —Q6 After 6 forced to his KR8. 7. B- Q3, ch 8. Kt - Q2 9. Kt — B3 10 K -—Q7 11. B- B4, ch 12. B-K6 So that the King cannot go to B4 V2 estes 13. K —-K7 14. B —~Kt4 15. Kt —-K5 16. K — B6 17. Kt — B7 18. B— Bd K — K5 K — B4 K —K6, 7. K —K5 the Black King would soon be K - B3 kK - B2 K — B3 K — B2 K B83 K — Kt2 K —- Kt3 K — Kt2 K —-R3 K - R2 K — Ktl K -Bl Now comes the more difficult part—the King must be forced into the suitable corner. To do this the pieces must make the following moves. The White King moves only along the sixth 42 THE END-GAME rank as far as QKt6; he, therefore, makes the moves K — K6, K — Q6, K — B6 and K —Kt6. Until the King is in the correct corner, the Knight has to make only the four zig-zag moves Kt -K5, Kt-Q7, Kt-B5 and Kt-—Kt7. The Bishop has to rob the King of white squares and, in addition, to make a waiting move now and then. By this division of labour it is quite simple to hunt the King across to White’s QR8. 19. B-R7 K - Kl 20. Kt -K5 K-B1? K —QI1 is better and gives White more difficulty. It will be examined later (see Diagram No. 49). 21. Kt - Q7, ch K-K1 22. K -K6 K-QI 23. K — Q6 K -K1 24. B —Kt6, ch The King threatens to escape via KB2. pd Pare K-Ql 25. Kt — BS K - Bl 26. B - B7 A waiting move. Here a move by the Knight or the King would loosen the cordon. WO ivers K —- QI] 27. Kt — Kt7, ch K-BIl 28. K ~ B6 K- Ktl 29, K —Kt6 K-BI 30. B —K6, ch K — Ktl Now the King is imprisoned in the suitable corner and the mate is simple. 31. Kt — BS K -RIl Now beware of stalemate! It would follow either 32. Kt — R6? or 32. B-Q5, ch’, K —Ktl; 33. B—Kt7? Therefore, instead, another waiting move. 32. B- Q7 K - Ktl ' 33. Kt — R6, ch K-RI 34. B — B6, mate. THE END-GAME 43 Position after White’s 20th move No 49 bb% vA a ly Ys \ Sb, Yyy } Ay, tig 4 YS Ui, ee oe OE Via a / 7 / e / 20 K —- QI! Now the King threatens to escape via QB2 and QKt3 to QRS 21 K-K6 kK R2 22 Kt - Q7! k - kt2! k — B3 would ease White s tash,2¢ 22 A-B3 23 B Q3! h-B2 24 B-K4!l and the cordonis closed again — After the text move Black threatens K — R38 23 B-Q3! K —B3 If kh — B2’, then B- K4! 94 B-h2 Again a waiting move Other books give B-R6 Phat shortens the solution by a move but Icads to more dificult positions and 1s not so systematic as the Bishop manauvre 1 give, which leads 1n three moves to the previous main line of play 24 K —- B2 If K —Kt2, then K — Q6 25 B-B3! kK -QI 26 kh —Q6 With this move we reach the position after White’s 23rd move 1n the main line of play, except that the Bishop 1s at 44 THE END-GAME KB3 instead of at KR7. Now there follows: 26....K —KI1; 27. B—- R65, ch, etc. as in that line of play. * % Two Knights can mate a King only when he has a pawn, since that prevents stalemate. This mate hardly ever occurs in actual play. x * Rook AND BisHorP v. Rook This end-game is as difficult as it is beautiful. It occurs comparatively rarely. Often enough the attacker can quite easily drive his opponent’s King to an edge, but, if the Kings are not in Opposition, then theoretically he cannot win. In actual play, however, the de- fender can easily make mistakes since mates are threatened on all sides. No. 50 is Phili- dor’s classical position with its extremely ingenious solu- tion : Black is threatening to drive White’s King from its favourable attacking position by ].... R-K2, ch; 2. K-B6, R-B2, ch. This cannot be pre- vented by 1. B-—Q6 or B6 because after 1....R —K2_ ch; 2. Bx R Black would be stalemated. Therefore the play is: 1, R-B8, ch R-QI 2. R-B7 R — Q7 The best move. How easily Black can lose is seen from the consequences of 2.... K — Bl, wz. 3. R-KR7, R—K1], ch; 4.K-B6, K-Ktl; 5.R-Kt7,ch, K-Rl (if K-B1}?, then B-Q6,ch); 6.R-Ktl, K-R2 (if R-Bl,ch, then K —K7, ch; or, if 6....R—Rl1, then 7. K —B7, ch, K —R2; 8. R-—Rl, mate); 7. K-B7 and wins. All this is forced. 2... R-Q7 is best; R-—Q8 and R-Q6 are inferior. White must now drive the Rook on to one of those squares. With this object in view he makes a waiting move. 3. R —- QKt7 R ~— Q8 THE END-GAME 45 R — Q6 will be examined after the 5th move. 4.R -Kt7 White threatens mate, first on the right, then on the left. 4... R — KB8! 4... K—Bl would be weak for after 5. R-KR7, R-KKts8; 6. R —-R7, K - Kt] Black’s Rook would be won by checks at QR8, KR8 and KKt8, while after 6.... R —Kt3, ch (instead of K —-Ktl); 7. B-B6, K —Ktl? checks at QR8 and KR8 bring about mate. 5. B -Kt3 Now we see why the Rook was driven to Q8 or Q6. If it were standing on the seventh rank, it could give an annoying check at K7. If the Rook had moved to the sixth rank (3.... R —Q6), then the continuation would have been 4. R—Kt7, R—KB6; 5. R —-K7, ch, giving the position after White’s 7th move in the variation B (q.v.). Now Black has the choice of K — Bl or R - B6. (A) Dass K -Bl 6. RR —Kt4 Threatening B — Q6, ch, followed by R — Kt8, ch, ete. Os.0s52 K - Kl! 7. R-—QB4! R — Q8! K — Ql? would be bad because of B — R4, ch, etc. 7....K—-—Bl would also be bad because of 8. B—K5, K —Ktl; 9. R—-KR4, followed by mate. 8. B-R4 K -Bl! 9. B- B6 R — K8, ch 10. B-—K5 K —-Ktl 11. R-KR4 Mate can be delayed only by the sacrifice of the Rook. (B) Doses R - B6 6. B—Q6 R — K6, ch 7.B-K5 R — KB6! If K —Bl?, then R —-KR7. 8. R — K7, ch! K—-Bl! 46 THE END-GAME If K —Q1?, then R —- QKt7. 9. R-QB7 K — Ktl 10. R — Kt7, ch K -Bl If K — Rl, then R — Kts8, ch. 11.R-Kt4! Threatening B — Q6, ch, etc. 1 ere K -K]l If R —K6, then R —-KR4 and wins. 12. B-B4! Mate cannot be delayed without sacrifice, for, if 12... then 13. B —Q6, ch, is decisive. ov Rook anp Kwniagut v. Rook Only in some very exceptional positions at the edge of the board can the end-game Rook and Knight v. Rook be won. S08 aS a "4, SS“ om Very frequent and, therefore, very important is the co-opera- tion of a Rook on the seventh rank and a Knight at B6 that voy ns occasionally provides a mating _- i A Y continuation even in the middle game. In position No. 51 it Wy, yy\| gives a draw by perpetual 7 ie ae 7 check: 1. Kt - B6, ch, K-—B1; 2. Kt - GA wy _ ‘ os te os 8. ae R7, ch, K — Ktl; 3. Kt and the King dare not move to Rl because of R—-R7, mate. This mate often occurs, even as early as the middle game. If the King is in the corner and a Knight gets to B6 then all that is needed to make a mate almost unavoidable is a Rook on the seventh rank. For the equally frequent perpetual check the Rook must be at Q7 or else the King will escape via QI. THE END-GAME 47 Rook v. BrsHor This end-game usually results in a draw. Only when the Kings are in Opposition—always a dangerous position for the defender—on squares of a differ- ent colour from those on which the Bishop moves, when the de- fending King is on the edge and the attacker has the move (otherwise the defending King would escape with all speed from the unpleasant vis-a-vis), then it is possible to combine mating threats with attacks on the Bishop. The game is then won. (Exceptions to this are Y Y yy aM Se Ay, WZ positions in the corners, which W/. Wi YW We are not to be won.) Other — winning positions are infrequent exceptions. The above is the classical position (No. 52): White must now continually either attack the Bishop or threaten mate—otherwise the King will escape. 1. R- Kt3 B-K5 The safest position for the Bishop is either in or near to the line in which the Kings are standing. Here it can be captured only by a particular subtlety, while in the other files it is won by means of mating attacks, eg. 1.... B-Q4 or Q8; 2. R-Q3, B -B3 or R5 respectively; 3. R -—Q8, ch, B-K1; 4. R-R8 and wins. If 1....B-—Kt2, then 2. R-Kt3, ete. If 1.... B—-R4 or R8, then 2. R-KR38, B-B2 or Q+4 respec- tively; 3.R-—R8,ch, B-Ktl; 4. K-—Kt6 and wins. If l.... B—Rl, then 2. R-—Kt3!, etc. B-B3 will be examined later. 1....B-—K7 leads via 2. R-Kt2, B-B6; 3. R-KB2 to the same decisive position. 2.R-K3 B —-Kt7 If 2...B-—R2, then 3. R-QKt3!, K-K1; 4. R —Kt8, ch, K —Q2; 5. R-Kt7, ch, wins the Bishop. 3.R-K2 B - BG (or B8) 4,R —-KB2 This is the decisive position. The Bishop must now abandon No. 52 Y ty ; Yy \ ~ SOO Vs MA, UA J Va Wt i, Me, ie, a meee N yyy, “ < 48 THE END-GAME its refuge in or near to the file in which the Kings are standing, for, if 4.... B —-K5 or Kt5, then it is captured after 5. K — K5, ch or K — Kt5, ch respectively. ae B — B3! This flight-square offers the nearest approach to safety. 5. R - B2 B — Q2! Now 6. R-Q2 would be useless because of 6.... K —K1! 6. R — QKt2! K — Ktl 7. R-Kt8, ch K —R2 8. R —-Kt7, winning the Bishop. The attack- ing moves are all very elegant. x Rook v. KNIGHT This end-game generally cannot be won, even in positions on the edge of the board. However, the Knight must stay near to its King. If it strays away, it can easily be captured. Thus in No. 53: After 1.... Kt—Ktl, ch, the game is.a draw. On the other hand, 1.... Kt —Kt5, ch? loses: | eee Kt — Kt5, ch? 2.K-K6 K -Ql Mate is threatened. '3.R-R4 Kt —-K6 THE END-GAME 49 If Kt - B7, then K — Bd followed by R — Q4, ch, and White’s King advances on the Knight 4.R-—K4 Kt — B77! If Kt ~Kt7, then K —B5 and the Knight is eventually cap- tured. 5. K -Q5 Kt — R6 6. K — BS Kt — Kt8 If Kt — B7, then R — K2. 7,.K-—Kt4 Or first R — Q4, ch. Vivauie K — B2 If Kt — Q7, then R — Q4, ch, winning the Knight. 8. R-K2 and after R —- QKt2 the Knight is lost. If in the end-game of Rook against a minor piece each side has pawns as well, then the advantage of the Exchange is decisive. Rook Enp-GAMES (Rooks and Pawns) These are the most difficult end-games there are and they occur with the greatest frequency. Philidor’s Drawn Position Rook and pawn cannot win against Rook if the defending King occupies the queening square. The critical rank is the sixth. In No. 54 Black’s Rook has occupied it and does best to move to and fro along it until the pawn advances to K6. | ee R —- QR3 2. P-K5 R -QKt3 3. P—-K6 Now and not earlier the Black Rook moves to Black’s 8th rank and attacks White’s King which can no longer hide behind his E 50 THE END-GAME pawn. (If the latter were still at K5, then the King would have at his disposal the safe square K6.) The Rook attacks by R-B8, ch, R-K8, ch, etc., continuing until the King is out of reach of the pawn, e.g. at QKt5. Then Black attacks the pawn with Rook and King—and wins it. If the Rook mistakenly leaves the sixth rank (Black’s third) too early, then his King is forced a file away from the queening square. | eee R - QR3 2. P-K5 R — R8? 3. K — B6! R — B8, ch 4.K —-K6 and the Black King has to give way. At one time it was thought that in this position Black was lost, since the play was continued thus: 4.... K -BI1!; 5. R —R8, ch, No. 54 No. 55 U ve u oe aon ee ee {nf 8 of 8 wee ee “8 hve 8 Be _ a 2 mm me oo 2 6 oe 1 ee K — Kt2; 6. R —-K8, R —- K8?; 7. K — Q7, K — B2; 8. P — K6, ch, K —Kt2. Karstedt and subsequently the author have shown that by correct play, even after Black’s King has been forced off the queening square, the game can be saved if Black plays (instead of 6....R —K8?) 6....R —QR8 and gives checks from the flank at QR3, etc. For a player defending against a pawn on the fifth or even on the sixth rank to obtain a draw, even after his King has been forced off the queening square, the following conditions must obtain: The file on which the pawn stands divides the board into two unequal parts. The de- fending Rook’ must stand in the larger part and must give checks from the flank at the greatest possible distance from the THE END-GAME 51 attacking King. Nothing less than a distance of three files makes it possible for the Rook to keep on giving check, other- wise it would ultimately be attacked by the King. The de- fending King must stand in the smaller part. In position No. 55 (arrived at after White’s 4th move in the second variation discussed in connection with No. 54) Black’s King can play to Bl or Ql]. But only K —B1 is in accord- ance with the principle just mentioned. It leads to a draw, whereas K — Q] loses. (1) 4. os. K-BL! 5. R-R8, ch K -Kt2 6. R-K8 R -QR8! A long series of checks from the flank is now threatened. If after R —R3, ch White plays K — Bd, then Black’s King goes to B2 and the position approximates to Philidor’s drawn one. 7. R-Q8 R — K8! Preventing the advance of the King and pawn. If 8. K-—Q6, then 8.... K — B2 will again prevent the advance of the pawn. 8. R -Q5 In order to play K — K7. 8. .... K -Bl! 9. K -Q7 K — B2 and the pawn cannot proceed. The game is a draw. (2) If, instead of 4....K -—B1, Black plays 4.... K -Q1?, then White wins quite easily. A wis K — Ql]? 5. R —- R8, ch K — B2 6. K —-K7 R —-K8 Black has no good move. 6.... R~KKt8 would be quite use- less on account of 7. P —-K6, R —-Kt2, ch; 8. K —- B6, R - Kts8; 9. P-K7, R -B8, ch; 10. K — Kt5, etc. 7. P-K6 R —-K7 If R -KB8, then K - K8. 8. K —- B7 R — B7, ch 9. K —-K8 and by P-K7, R —R4 and R - B4, ch White obtains Lucena’s winning position, which is dealt with in No. 56. 52 THE END-GAME From these demonstrations we see that in Position No. 55 White wins if his Rook is at QR7 (instead of KR7) since then the Black Rook, when giving checks from the flank (R - QKt3, ch, etc.), will be only two files removed from the White King which can, therefore, successfully approach it. Further, we see that the Knight’s pawn always wins in these circumstances since there is no room for the defending King in the smaller part of the board ao and therefore the conditions UY ff} A877, laid down as essential to a draw Y/ WY; Y cannot be fulfilled. se Vii A. ; Va J ee W/ 7 Wy Lucena’s Winning Position a - — a Lucena’s winning position a (No. 56) is typical and very - oa "es often occurs. You must always YW Y 4, strive to obtain it, therefore W/; . a te — ag ‘I bring your King in front of the V1. 7 EZ pawn. By driving away the enemy King White secures an outlet at KB7 for his own and escapes from check by interposing his Rook at KKt5 (not at KKt4 as all other text-books give). Thus: | Began R-R6 If R —-K7, then R -KRI, securing his King an outlet on the Rook’s file. Y 2. R- Bd Or, equally well, R-K1,ch. Not R-B4, as given by other books. ee R-R8 3. R -K5, ch K — Q2 4.K -B7 R — B8, ch 5. K —-Kt6 R — Kt8, ch 6. R — Ktd and wins. If Black upsets this plan by playing his King to K2 and then to Q3, then White’s King moves to K8 and his Rook to K7: ee R -R6 2. R - BS K - K2 3. R — K5, ch K — Q3 THE END-GAME 53 4, K -B8 R — B6, ch 5. K - K8 R - KKt6 6. R -K7 followed by 7. K-B8 and 8. R -KB7. As I have already mentioned, you must strive to obtain this winning position and therefore you must always bring your King in front of the pawn. If the enemy King is not in front of the pawn, then naturally you must try to keep him away from that position—and as far as possible. Thus in No. 57 the play is: . | ee R — Q5 If White’s King were at QKt6, then naturally by 1.... R-QB5 No. 57 rh 2m “a “a _—_ 4 =m 7 WY pies es ates ae o 2 8 Black would keep him even further away than he is after the text-move. ‘2. R-K7 K - B5 3. K - B5 m, R -— Q8 4.K-B4 P-—K5 5. K — B3 K — B6 6. K - B2 R - Q4 and after P -K6, K —-B7, P-—K7 and K —- K8 Black arrives at Lucena’s position. * Rook’s pawns are very difficult to turn to account. The weaker side nearly always obtains a draw. B8, ch, K - B2 or 1R- THE END-GAME Some typical winning positions: In position No. 58 White wins by R-K1; 2. P - Q7, etc. In position No. 59 the Black King is unfavourably placed. He should be at either KKt2 or KR2. Asa result, the following wS 88 3. 5 On =2 = " a aE: | hp ml 2 Ea hom ae ‘| ge ose i “ “at a “a “a “3 ss complicated Rook end-games you must try to obtain such pawns whenever possible. x ¥ No. 60 — R7, Yes a Yi R xP, then 3. R No. 58 Two united passed pawns nearly always win. “trick” is possible: 1. P -R7, R for, if 2.... In No. 60 the play is: THE END-GAME 55 ere R-R7 2. K —-Kt4 You must always bear in mind that in the end-game the King is the most important piece. It is not so important to advance the pawns as it is the King. The enemy King must be forced further and further back until mating positions occur. ae R—-R8& 3. R — R6, ch K — B2 4.K—-Ktd5 P-R7 Black now threatens to obtain a draw, if (for example) 5. P-R5?, by 5.... R -KKt8; 6. R xP, Rx P, ch. 5. P-Kt4 K —K2 6. R — R7, ch K —- KI 7.P-R5 K ~-Bl 8. P-R6 Now Black must give up his pawn, for, after 8.... K —Ktl; 9, K —-Kt6, K-—Bl; 10.P-R7,R-R8; 11.R~xP or 8... K —K1; 9. P-R7, R—R8; 10. K —- Kt6, P —-R8(Q); 11.RxQ it is still lost and in much more unfavourable circumstances. eee R — QKt8 9.RxP K — Ktl 10. R — R8, ch K ~—R2 The King is now in a stalemate position. This must always be altered at once. 11. R-R7, ch K-Rl 12. R —- KB?! To guard against checks from the flank after K — Kt6. | eee R-—Kt4, ch 13. K —-Kt6 R — Kt3, ch 14. R- B6 R -Ktl 15. P-Kt5 R-Rl 16. R — BS! Once again a protection against a flank attack—R —R4 which after 16. K —R5 would pin the Knight’s pawn. Not 16. P-R7 because then Black’s King would be in a stale- mate position. 163 sas K — Ktl 60 THE END-GAME 1. R~R6! An exception to the rule ‘‘The Rook’s place is behind the pawn”’. After 1. R-QB7?, K-Q4; 2.K-Kt7, K-Q5, 3. K - B6, No. 66 No. 66 Soe a _ Ae OC YJ 28 6 a gm ee wy of P-B6, 4.K-B5, K-Q6 5 K-B4, P-B7, 6 K -B3, K ~-Q7 Black would draw. | K — Q3 2 K -Kt7 P — B6 If K B38, then the White King continues to approach 3 KR KS Pp - B7 $4. R —-QB3 and wins ‘% Noa 67 Two united passed pawns on the sixth rank win against a Rook unless the opposing King won their neighbourhood or, naturally, unless the other side has the move and can at once play Rx P Thus in No 66. 1] R- QBs or R-K3, P-Kt7 or B7, ete If, however, the Kings are in Opposition, then mating com- binations and salvation are possible (No. 67). Black, with the move, wins by P-R7 or P-Kt7. White, with the move, plays 1 R-BI! P —-Kt7 THE END-GAME 61 In reply to a move by the King White wins by K — Q3 and then K — B3. 2. R -Ktl, ch K — R6 If 2.... K —R4, then White keeps on taking the Opposition and threatening mate: 3. K -B5, K-—R3; 4. K — B6, etc. 3. K -B3 K — R5! and draws. If 3.... K -R7?, then White by 4. R —- Ktl!, P —-R7; 5. R x P, ch wins both pawns. x» Against a chain of three united passed pawns with the fore- most on the sixth rank King and Rook draw. » ¥ No 68 END-GAMES WITH MINOR PIECES A pawn supported by a minor piece casily wins against a King = Difficulties arise only é ; ; : D with a Rook's pawn. A Rook's wy - pawn and a Bishop can win e j ly when the Bis! re isd only when the bishop moves on / squares of the same colour 4s the queening square or when the enemy King can be hept off that square (as in position No. 65) 1P RG K — B2 The King is threatemmng to go into the corner ma KKtl and then White can do no more than stalemate him 2. B - R77! This elegant move defeats Black’s plan. Dis bt K - B3 Threatening to play K - Kt4 and then capture the pawn. 3. K — B4 or Kt4 Now the three White men form a cordon through which the Black King cannot break. An essential to the practicability 62 THE END-GAME of the whole manceuvre 1s that the King of the stronger side shall be near enough to complete this cordon Now the Black King 1s forced away by Zugzwang 3 K - B2 4 K~-—B5 K -Bl 5 K-B6 K -K] 6 K -Kt7 Now the way 18 open for the pawn 4 A Knight must support from behind a pawn which 1s threatened by a King, otherwise the latter successfully attacks both In position No 69 Black forces a draw by hk - B5 x‘ In position No 70 White wins K Q6 can be ignored since the King cannot capture the Knight without allowing the pawn No 69 No 70 to go on to queen White therefore, amply brings up his King and reheves the Amght from guarding the pawn ‘x In position No 71 White wins quite casily, only he must beware of giving stalemate 1 K-R4 or Bt K R2 (K-B3 or B2 would allow the pawn to be advanced at ome) 2 K-R5 or Kt5, K Ktl, 3 K-Kt6é, K-R1l, 4+ At K6 (naturally not P-R7 or THE END-GAME 63 Kt —Q7 because of stalemate), K-—-Ktl 5&5 P—-—R7, ch, K-#l? (or 5 K-BI, 6 P—R8(Q), ch), 6 Kt — B7, mate ¥ The attacker must not advance his pawn to the seventh rank too soon (see No 72) By 1 K-Kt6, K-R1 2 Kt-—B7,ch White wins quite eamly After 1 P—R7, ch?, K —Rl1 the game 1s drawn since, No 71 No 72 e R aA Wf Winite s King approaches Black 1s stalemated The same draw would occur if the Knight wore guarding the piwn from Bo x In No 73 the turn to move decides the issue and against the player who has to move If Black has to do so, he 18 forced to allow the im prisoned King to escape to Kt7 or AtsS and then the pawn queens If White has to move he has nothing better than a check at Q6, whereupon the Black King goesto Bland alte: nates between that square and Bl If the Knight 1s standing on any other white square (¢ g on White s KR1) then the case 19 just the same If Winte has to move, then the Kmight, when it reaches the scene of action, No 73 64 THE END-GAME ean only check the King standing at B1 or B2 and the game is a draw. The reverse would be the case if the Knight were on any black square (except QKt6, Q6 and K7) and White had the move. Then the Knight could move only to a white square, therefore would not give check but would eventually (e.g. at White’s Q5) take from the Black King his B2 and thus compel him to let the White King escape. *¥ KNIGHT v. KING AND PAWN In some circumstances a Knight, with the help of its King and an enemy Rook’s pawn, can imprison the opposing King in a corner and mate him (see No. 74). The play is) 1. Kt—B6, P-—Kt4, 2. Kt—Kt4, ch, K -R8, 3. K- Bl, P—R7, 4 Kt - BY, mate. Or, if Black 18 to move, | . K-R&, 2. Kt - B6, K - R77! (if P- R7?%, then Kt -K4 followed by Kt—Kt3, mate), No 71 No 75 3 Kt-—Kt4,ch, K-RS 4K BI, P-—Kt4, 5. K —B2, P-R7; 6. Kt-K3, P Kts, 7. Kt - Bl or BS, P — Kt6, ch; 8. Kt x P, mate. In position No. 75 the play was. 1.... B-R2, ch!, 2 K xB, K-B2, 3 K-R8&, Kt Q5, 4 K-R7 (if 4 P-—B6, then 4... Kt-Kt4. 5 P -R7, K-BI, 6. P-B7, KtxP, mate), Kt —Kt4, ch, 5 K -R8, K-B1, 6 P-B6, K -B2, 7 P-—R7, K - Bl; 8. P - B7, Kt x P, mate Or 1... B-—R2, ch, 2 K-Kt7, Kt-Q5, 3 K xB (other- wise Black guards the Bishop with the Kmght and wins both pawns), K- B2, 4. K - R8 (4. P- BG, Kt - At4, ch is merely THE END-GAME 65 transposition), Kt-Kt4, 5 P-B6, K-Bl, 6. P-B7, Kt <P, ch, 7. K -R7, Kt -Q4!, 8 K-R8, K- B2, 9. K-R7, t-K2, 10 K-R&, Kt-Bl, 11 P-R7, Kt—Kt3, mate. FY % ' A Kmight, even without the help of its King, can draw against a pawn on the sixth rank supported by 1ts King (No 76) No 76 No 77 1 Kt—-Bl,ch,K —-Kt7 2 Kt — Q3, ch, K — B7, 3 Kt — Kt4,ch, K-Kt6, 4 Kt-Q3, P-R7, 5 Kt-Bl,ch, followed by KtxP * On the other hand, in position No 77 the Knight 18 helpless * In general, in the end game (asin the rest of the game) the Bishop 1s shghtly superior to the Kmght There 1s an excep- fon A Kmght in the centre, guarded and unassailable, 1s ronger than a Bishop Also in blocked positions a Knight ften proves to be more useful than a Bishop Knight posted on an edge of the board can be held captive by a Bishop if the latter stands in the same rank and two files a or in the same file and two ranks away, a5 in Diagram o 78 A Bishop can hold up pawns much more easily than a Kmght snd, naturally, especially so when passed pawns are advancing F 66 THE END-GAME on both flanks. A Bishop usually draws easily against two pawns, sometimes even against three. This, of course, is de- pendent upon the position. _ No. 78 No. 79 aan LA, ne a om os eit” Y a state anata = In position No. 79 the Bishop loses as the pawns are already too far advanced. 1.... P—Kt6; 2.P xP, P-R6; 3. B-Ktl, P-B6 followed by P —R7 and P — B7 (or vice versa). ¥* oe ta 7s a _— oY a In a struggle between Bishops on different colours a pawn superiority is often insufficient to lead to a win (No. 80). White’s Bishop moves to and fro in the long diagonal. If Black plays his King to QB7 and then his Bishop’s pawn to B6, then the Bishop captures er a ™ 77 the pawn and, if ae King Y Y) RZ Y recaptures, Whiteis stalemated. Mh WY Zz TE lid YW); Obviously Black has played i te in parti his pawns badly; in particular, y No. 80 he has advanced his Rook’s a 7] Y * pawn too soon. If you have a Bishop on the white squares, g 7. then a must endeavour to place your pawns on the black; the Bishop can then dislodge any men which insert themselves among the pawns and hold them up. (Philidor’s rule). Thus in position No. 81 White must try to make possible the THE END-GAME 67 advance of his King’s pawn; therefore he must get his King to Q7 or KB7. He plays 1. B - R4, therefore, and then brings his King across to Q7. By playing 1.... B — B6, ch, which forces the King to KB5 but after which the Bishop must at once return to Kt5 to stop P—K7, ch, Black can only delay the King’s advance to Q7. Similarly, the hindrance by K -K1 (after White has played his King to QB6) is only temporary since there follows K — B7, ch and then K —Q7. Black can disturb the decisive manceuvre of the King only by sacrificing his pawn and then playing K-K1. There follows, however, 77 = me 7 — a 7 a _" air _ a: ™ — as ) _ act a7 ‘a Vi, os — Aa 7 sun Yj “— + Vek YU 7 __ [A ia We V/ 777 Z (m/s a check by White’s Bishop at either QR4 or KR5 and then White’s King proceeds to Q7 or KB7 (according to whether Black’s has played to KB] or Q1). The advance of the King’s pawn then cannot be prevented—and White queens a pawn. ¥ “Ys \ — oe W Two passed pawns separated only by a single file cannot win if the Bishops are on different colours (No. 82). 1.K-K6, B-Kt5; 2.B-K4, K-Ql1; 3.K-B7, B-R6; 4,P- K6, B - Kt5. Now by 5.P- K7, ch, Bx P; 6. P-B7, ch (the order of these pawn moves may be reversed) White can win the Bishop but not the game. If, however, the pawns are separated by two files, e.g. if the King’s pawn were a King’s Bishop’s pawn so that eventually White has his King at KKt7 and a pawn at KB7, then White first wins the Bishop by queening the King’s Bishop’ 8 pawn—and then the game. 68 THE END-GAME A passed pawn on each flank always leads to a win, even if the Bishops are on different colours. * If the Bishops are on the same colour, then an advantage of a single pawn is often decisive (No. 83). These end-games are won by twice confronting the hostile Bishop by one’s own; the first time in front of the pawn, the second alongside of it. 1.... K -Q4; 2. B-K7, B —B7; 3. B —-Kt4or B8, B — R5; 4. B - B3 or Kt7 respectively, K — K5; 5. B — B6 and wins. If, however, Black’s King were at his K5 and it was Black’s turn to move, he could play his King to K B4 and so prevent the decisive B-B6. Then the game could not be won. No. 83 ¥* ¥ Pawn ENDINGS (Kings and Pawns) These endings are among the most delicate and difficult that there are. The queening of a pawn is the usual objective. A single pawn against a lone King usually needs the assistance of its own King. The latter must go in front of it as a pioneer (one might say) and clear a path for it by con- fronting the hostile King and taking the Opposition. It cannot be too greatly emphas- ized that the most important réle in pawn endings is played by the King. Not the pawn but the King must be in advance. Thus in example No. 84 THE END-GAME 69 with 1.P-—B4? White would at once let victory slip from his grasp. The continuation would be: : ee K — Kt2 2. K — Kt2 K — B3 or Kt3 3. K —-Kt3 K — B4 4,K -B3 Now the Kings are in Opposition; the Black King must give way, must give up the Opposition, therefore White has gained the Opposition, as we say. But Opposition with the supporting King behind or alongside of the pawn is useless. You must get the Opposition in front of the pawn in order to clear its path to the eighth rank. The continuation is: ee K - B3 5. K-Kt4orK4 K—-Kt3 or K3 respectively 6. P — B5, ch K — B3 7. K - B4 K - B2 8. K —-Kt5 K - Kt2 9. P —- B6, ch K — B2 10. K - B5 K-Bl! 11. K -Kt6 K - Ktl 12. P ~ B7, ch If the pawn on reaching the seventh rank gives check, there is no win. ae K - Bl 13. K —- B6 Black is stalemated—but any other move by White loses the pawn. With 10.... K —- Ktl? (instead of K — B1) Black loses. He must try to gain the Opposition, but now, after this faulty move, White gains it by 11. K -Kt6 which is immediately decisive. When the supporting King is on the sixth rank the Opposition even alongside of the pawn is decisive. The continuation is: 16 awe K -Bl 12. P- B7 The pawn thus reaches the seventh rank without giving check —and White wins. 2 sis K ~K2 13. K —Kt7 followed by 14. P - B8 (Q). 70 THE END-GAME The correct method—with which White (having the move in position No. 84) wins—is to strive for the Opposition in front of the pawn: 1. K -Kt2 K — Kt2 2. K —-Kt3 K — Kt3 3. K -Kt4 K -— B3 4.K—-B4 This position is decisive; but further, White has at his disposal the waiting move P — B3 which, if it were now his turn to move, would maintain the Opposition for him and so make victory certain. 4. K — Kt3 The Black King has to give way by moving to one side (or backward) whereupon White gains ground by moving forward on the opposite side (or straight forward). 5. K —-K5 After 5. P —- B3?, K — B3! Black would have the Opposition and thus would obtain a draw. Pawn moves can come later, first of all the King must gain ground. Dates K - B2 Or 5.... K —Ki4; 6. P-B4, ch, K —-Kt3; 7. K —-K6! (but not 7.P-B5, ch? because then 7....K—-B2 draws), K —Kt2; 8. P-—B5 (K—K7 would be useless because of K — Kt3), K—-B1; 9. K —- B6! (not 9. P —- B6? because after 9.... K —K1; 10. P - B7, ch, the game is drawn), K ~K1; 10. K-Kt7 and now, since the White King commands B7 and B8, the pawn’s advance to queen cannot be stopped. 6. K —-B5 K —K2 7. K —-Kt6 K -Bl Or 7.... K-K3; 8. P-—B4, K —K2; 9. P — B35, etc. 8. K - B6 K - Ktl Now at last the pawn can proceed. 9, P-B4 K -Bl 10. P —- B5 K - Ktl 11. K —-K7 and the further advance of the pawn is assured. THE END-GAME 71 If in position No. 84 it were Black’s turn to move, he would draw since he would secure the Opposition: i ae K — Kt2 2. K —Kt2 K —Kt3 3. K —Kt3 K —Kt4 4.K —B3 K — B4 White must now give up the Opposition. The play continues: 5. K —-Kt3 K ~—Kt4 6. P — B4, ch K — B4 with transposition into the variation in which White played 1, P - B4? * If the attacking King is on his side’s third, fourth or fifth rank, he must have the Opposition in front of the pawn in order to win (that is, of course, if the hostile King is in the way). If, however, the attacking King has advanced to the sixth rank, then his side wins even if the Opposition in front of the pawn has to be relinquished. No. 85 is a winning position, if Black has to move. No. 85 No. 86 oe mv ‘fe a Y % \ 4 CA No. 86 is a winning position, whoever has to move. 1,.K-—Kt6, K-Ktl; 2. P-—B6, K-Bl; 3. P—B7 (the pawn reaches the seventh rank without giving check), K —K2; 4. K —- Kt7, etc. \ \\ \N fe % \ Nv \ Ye ; y ‘be La * 72 THE END-GAME The Rook’s pawn cannot win if the enemy’s; King is too near (No. 87). 1,.P-R6, K-Rl; 2. P-R7. Black is stalemated- Another—and a very pretty—stalemating possibiity is shown in position No. 88. No. 87 No. 88 6 ge te . mo nee ae Zu se “a 4 Y \\ 4 . , SS “— - 2 oe eB a e — _ Hd 1.... K— B3 (or B2); 2. K-R7, K-—B2; 3.P-—R6, K—-BI; 4.K—-R8, K-B2. Black has imprisoned the White King. After 5. P — R7, K — B1 White is stalemated, while, if 5. K — R7, then 5....K—Bl and White gets no further forward for, if 6. K —Kt6, then the Black King goes into the corner. If, instead, White had the move, he would safeguard the advance of the pawn by playing 1. K —- Kt7 and so win. To make certain whether a passed pawn can be overtaken by the hostile King there is a very simple method suggested by Berger. You draw from the pawn the diagonal to the edge which the pawnis trying toreach (in No. 89 the diagonal will be from White’s KKt3 to his QKt8) and then construct the square of which it is the diagonal. If the hostile King is already in this square or if, having the move, he can enter it, then he will overtake the pawn. (It is presupposed that on his way the King will meet with no other obstacles in the shape of his own or opposing pawns.) For a pawn standing on the second rank you must, on account of its 2-square advance, draw the diagonal from THE END-GAME 73 the square in front of it, 1.e. for a pawn at KKt2 the diagonal must be drawn from KKt3. In position No. 89 Black, with the move, plays his King to Kt6 and will overtake the pawn, as you can easily prove for yourself. If White has the move, then he plays P —- Kt4 and Black’s King cannot at once enter the large square, the corner No. 90 squares of which are White’s KKt4, KKt8, QB8 and QB4. So the queening of the pawn cannot be prevented. Another very helpful device in pawn endings (as, indeed, in all endings) is to count and not work out the moves, perhaps ten to twelve in number, to be made by the Kings and pawns on each side. This method, first suggested by the author, will be fully explained on pages 89-93. Two isolated passed pawns indirectly guard each other (No. White, with the move, wins thus: 1.P-R4 P—R4 2. K —Q2 With this move the King enters the square. 7 ae P-R5 3. K ~K2 P-R6 4. K —-B2 K — B4 74 THE END-GAME Black dare not take the Bishop’s pawn otherwise the Rook’s pawn goes through to queen. 5. K —-Kt3 K — Kt3 The Black King now shows signs of being about to throw him- self upon the Rook’s pawn. By 6.KxP, K—Ré4; 7. P-B4, KxP; 8. P-B5, K ~Kt4 White would let victory slip from his grasp. He can, however, save both pawns. 6. P — B4! K —R4 7. P—B5! Now, if Black takes the Rook’s pawn, he cannot overtake the Bishop’s. In the same way, if he had played 6.... K — B4, the Rook’s pawn would have advanced. s ae K -R3 8.KxP K — Kt2 9. P—R5! Absolutely essential! Now K —B3 is followed by P —-R6 and K-—R3 by P-B6. Black dare not take either of the pawns and the White King soon comes to their assistance. In position No. 91 White cannot attain his objective by simple means. 1. K —- B6 K -QI! Not 1.... K —K] because of 2. K -K6, K -Q1; 3. P—-Q7 and wins. If you cannot obtain the usual Opposition, then at least you THE END-GAME 75 must make use of this diagonal Opposition. Now 2. K ~ K6, ‘K-—Kl; 3. P-Q7, ch, K-QI; 4. K - Q6 gives stalemate. Nevertheless, there is a way of winning: 2. P — Q7! KxP 3. K —- B7 By a pretty sacrifice White has obtained the Opposition. He now regains the pawn with a winning position. + ee K—-QIl 4.K —~K6 K — B2 5. K ~K7 K —Bl 6. K —Q6 K — Kt2 7.K —~Q7 K — Ktl 8. K x P and wins. ova A really charming method of breaking through, occasionally occurring in actual play, is the following (No. 92): 1. P—Kt6!! BP xP 2. P—R6 PxRP 3. P ~ B6 and the pawn goes on to queen. Three pawns against three! No. 92 A One would not have believed it! If 1....RP xP, then 2. P — B6, Px BP; 3. P—R6 and wins. If it is Black’s turn to move, he can safeguard himself against this surprise by playing 1.... P — Kt3, followed, if 2. RP xP, by 2....RPxP! or, if 2. BP xP, by 2.... BP xP! ¥% 76 THE END-GAME In position No. 93 the decisive move is 1.P-K5. There follows: | eee K - Kt3 2. K —- B6 K — Kt2 5 ae nw ant mi, If K - B4?, then K — Q6, winning the pawn at once. 3. K — Q6 or Q7 K — B2 4. K — Q7 or Q6 respectively 4. .... K -Bl 5. K x P and wins. The following line of play is extremely piquant: 1. P-—K5! K - Kt3 2. K - B6 K - Kt4 Now, if White makes the obvious attacking move 3. K — Q6?, the reply 3.... K —B4 wins the pawn and the game. In such positions the pawn must first be attacked from behind, there- fore: 3. K - Q7! K — B4 4. K —Q6, winning the pawn and the game. If it were Black’s turn to move, he would draw by playing 1.... P—K4. Admittedly, after 2. K ~B6, K -Kt3; 3. K -Q6 or Q5, K - B38; 4. K —Q5 or Q6 respectively, the pawn would be lost, but by 4....K-—B2!; 5.K xP, K-—K2 Black would secure the Opposition and with it a theoretically drawn position. There are very many chess puzzles or problems, containing end-game combinations or at least imaginary endings to games. THE END-GAME 77 [They may be differentiated, according to the conditions to be fulfilled, as (1) Mating Problems, and (2) Winning (or Drawing) Problems. (These last are generally quite unsuitably called ‘‘ Studies’). These compositions have generally a high artistic value. The Winning (or Draw- ing) Problems are certainly very well calculated to develop the power of combination. x ¥ Some LONGER END-GAMES The following protracted end- ame is particularly interesting nd instructive since we can istinguish in it quite a number f different phases. Position No. 94 is approxi- mately even, and with correct play on both sides should lead to'a draw. But, quite apart from really bad blunders, it is possible to make minor mistakes, the exploitation of which will give our opponent an advantage. ee R-QBI 2. B-—Q3 R-K3 3.R-Bl R(K3) — B3 4,.RxR RxR Black has command of the open Bishop’s file and threatens to play his Queen’s Bishop via QBI1 to KB4, exchange Bishops and then penetrate with his Rook to B7 with decisive advan- tage. This threat could easily be overlooked by a careless opponent. However, White can just parry it. 5.R-R1 ae way for the King and preparing the counter-attack ~ QR4. 5. cess B-Bl 6. K —-Bl B-— B4 7. K —K2! B xB, ch 8.K xB Now White has a slight advantage: his King is well in play. - ee R - B5 78 THE END-GAME To induce a loosening of White’s Queen’s side which later on makes itself very much felt. 9. P-QKt3 R-B3 10. P- QR4! Threatening to exchange pawns, penetrate with his Rook to R8 or R7 and then attack Black’s pawns from the rear. 10. ss P - Kt5! Threatening to win a pawn by R — B6, ch. 11. B- Q2 P —-QR4 The pawns have been decoyed on to black squares where later on the Bishop can attack them. White has now to try to secure for his Rook an open file, the King’s or the Queen’s Bishop’s, along which he can force his way into his opponent’s position. 12.R-K]l After R —QB1 and the exchange of Rooks the game would be a draw, for Black would prevent the attack B (wa B4) — B7 by B —QI and the entry of the White King by P - B3. Now the threat is R—K8, ch followed by R -QR8 i pre R-BI If 12.... R-K3, then 13. R-QB1 and White has gained his objective. If 12...K-Bl, then 13. B-—R6,ch, B-Kt2; 14.BxB,ch, KxB; 15.R-K5. If then 15.... R -B6, ch, White loses the Queen’s Knight’s pawn but wins the Queen’s and Queen’s Rook’s pawns. If, instead, 15.... RR —Q3, then White wins one or other of the pawns by 16. R — K7 followed by R-R7 or, if R-R3, by R —- Q7. 13. P-Kt4 Threatening to drive off the Bishop by P — Kt5 and then break in with the Rook wa K5 or K7. 13. .... P-—R3 This pawn cannot well be captured because of R-B6,ch. In reply to 13....P—Kt4, White could continue the attack with 14. R -KB1 followed by P—B4, Px P and R -B5, 14, P- R4! THE END-GAME 79 A continuation of the previously mentioned threat. White offers the sacrifice of several pawns. 14. .... Bx RP 15. R -K5 R-Ql If, instead, Black captures the Bishop’s pawn, then by 16.RxP, R-Rl; 17.BxRP White wins back both pawns and obtains a strong passed pawn. 16. Bx RP Position after White’s 16th move ma [ie] oe Yi LG ssicse K —R2 In reply to 16....Bx P White has two advantageous lines of play at his disposal: (1) R-—K7 followed by R-—R7 or, if R-Rl, by R-Q7; (2) 17. B-Kt5, R-Q2; 18. R-K8, ch, followed by R - QR8. Here 16.... B-B3 had to be considered. It would have been followed by 17. B —- Kt5!, B x B; 18.R x B, K — Bl; 19. R - K5, R-Q3; 20. P—Kt5, R-Q2; 21. P—B4, R-Q3; 22. P-—BS5, PxP; 23.Rx BP, K-K2; 24. K —-K3, R - Q2 (if R —- K3, ch, then K-B3); 25. K-B4, R-Q3; 26. K—K5 (threatening R xP, ch), R-Q1; 27. R - B6 followed by R — QR6, and White wins the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. After the King move in the text there are two snares for White to avoid: (1) 17. B- Kt5?, Bx B; 18.RxB, P-B3 and the Rook is lost!; and (2) 17. B-K3?, B —B3 and Black wins the Exchange. These things must be seen beforehand. Mistrust is the most necessary characteristic of the chess-player. 17. B-Q2 B-B3 80 THE END-GAME Not B x P because of R — K7 followed by R - R7. 18. R-Kl At last the Rook forces its way into the enemy position via either the King’s or the Queen’s Bishop’s file. White threatens not only R-QBI1 but also P-—Kt5 followed by R-K7. 18.... R-QB1 would be followed by 19. P-—Kt5, B-QI; 20. R — K5, winning the Queen’s pawn. But Black defends himself very carefully. He prepares to guard the Queen’s and Queen’s Rook’s pawns by Rook and Bishop respectively, so that White, in spite of all the little advantages he has already obtained, apparently cannot secure anything tangible. 18. .... R - Q2 19. R-QB1 K — Kt2 20. B — B4 Threatening B — B7. 20x B-Ql 21. R - B6! A new plan. The Bishop must be manceuvred to QKt6. yA ee P-B3 22. B — Q6 K — B2 23. B — BS P —Kt4 24, K — Q2! Not B —Kt6 at once, for then Black exchanges Bishops and plays R — B2 followed by R — B6, ch. 24. .... B —B2 25. B — Kt6 BxB 26.RxB R — B2 In Rook endings the only chance for the weaker side lies in whole-hearted counter-attack. To remain on the defensive generally leads to certain loss. 27. R — Q6! Not R —Kt5—which certainly looks just as good—for then Black guards his Queen’s pawn by K — K3 and after R x RP plays R — B6 and wins the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. After the text-move White wins a pawn. Dl xicins R—-B6 28, Rx P RxP 29. R x RP THE END-GAME 81 Now a new phase of the end-game is beginning. The gain of the pawn is as yet far from being decisive. In Rook endings the weaker side generally has some chances of a draw right up to the very end. In the position now reached Black has to meet a very definite and very important threat—that White by playing R — R6 will cut off the King, the most important piece in the end-game, just as at the moment White’s is cut off. 29. .... K — K3! Now, in reply to R — R6, ch, the Black King would not retreat to the second rank but, regardless of the loss of a pawn, would advance to the attack via Q4 and QB5—as, indeed, happens ter. .P—Q5,ch would be a distinct mistake because of .. K—-K4, 30. R -KB5 e continuation 30.R—Kt5, R-KB6; 31.R~xQKtP, xP, ch; 32. K-B3, P-—B4 would simplify the game too uch and give no better result. Black would still have draw- g chances. 30. .... R — QR6 In accordance with the rule ““The Rook’s place is behind the assed pawn’’. If White could play his Rook to his QR1 or R2, then victory for him would be a much easier matter. 31. P—R5 K — K2 32. K — B2 : White cannot make much progress as his King cannot play an effective part. A possible continuation here was 32. P-—Q5, K-—B2 (not RxP because the Rook would be lost after P-Q6, ch); 33. P-Q6, K-—K3; 34. R-—Q5 but this would merely have been a trap. Certainly, after 34....KxR he Queen’s pawn would have gone on to queen, but after .... K —Q2 White would have accomplished nothing. ae K —-K3 33. R —Kt5 nviting 33....R—R7,ch; 34. K—Kt3, Rx BP after which G 82 THE END-GAME by P-R6 followed by R-R65! White would get his Roo} behind the passed Rook’s pawn and would win. 33. .... K —Q3 34. K ~Kt2 K - K3 35. R — Kt6, ch t The exchange of White’s Rook’s pawn for Black’s Queen’ Knight’s pawn—35. R x QKtP, RxP; 36.K-B3, P-B4 merely simplifies the position and leads to a draw. By the text-move White plays to obtain two united passed pawns o1 the King’s side—the plan that offers the most winning chances, Now, however, Black’s passed pawn becomes very strong. 35. .... K — Q4! The whole-hearted offensive spirit! After 35.... K -K2} 36. P-R6, K-B2; 37. P-Q5, K-K2; 38. R - K6, ch, K - B2; 39. R-B6, K -K2; 40. R-—Kt6, K —- B2; 41. R - Kt7, chi followed by P ~R7 Black would be lost. 36. R x BP K — B5! After 36...K xP; 37. R-B5 White gets his united passec, pawns more quickly. 37. R-BS | P — R6 is no better. 5 ere R - Kt6, ch } To drive the enemy King away and make the passed Knight’ pawn a tower of strength. | 38. K —- B2 R - B6, ch 39. K — Q2 R — Q6, ch 40. K —-K2 RxP 40....P-—Kt6 would be weak because of 41. R-—-—B5, ch, K xP; 42. R - Q5, ch, forcing an exchange of Rooks. 41.P-R6 If 41.RxP, then 41....P-Kt6; 42. R-Kt8, P-Kt7; 43. R -Kt8, K-B6; 44. P-R6, Rx P; 45. P—R7, R -—QR5, and now it is White who has to play for—and force—a draw—by 46. R-B8,ch, K-Q5!; 47. R-QKt8, K —B6; 48. R — B8, ch. : 41... R-Ql THE END-GAME 83 1....R xP would be bad because of 42. P-R7, R—KS5, ch; 3.K -Q2, R-Kl; 44. R xP, P-Kt6; 45. R-Kt7, R-QRI if K —Kt5, then R — Kt7,ch followed by R — Kt8); 46. R — Kt7 .ollowed by the advance of the Bishop’s pawn. On the other hand, 41.... P—-Kt6 was quite good. | 42,.RxP P-Kt6 | 43. R - Kt7 Much better than R — Kt6, as you will soon see. eee P —Kt7 44,R-Kt7 K — B6 45. P —- B4 R -QRI Tf, instead, Black with the aid of his King plays his pawn on to ‘queen, then White wins easily as his Rook’s pawn imprisons Black’s Rook on the back rank: 45....K—B7; 46. P —B5d, be “ii 47.RxQ, KxR; 48.P-B6, R-QRI; 89. P - B7, etc. 46. P-B5 RxP f White’s Rook were at Kt6 instead of at Kt7 (see note to hite’s 43rd move), it would now have to lose a move and this oss would be of decisive importance. 47. K -K3 Position after White’s 47th move N NY NI Dae NY N WAT 47. .... R-R5 Threatening to win by interposing his Rook at QKt5. But the move loses a valuable tempo—and that costs Black the game, which could have been drawn by R-R8, viz. 47....R —R8; 86 THE END-GAME Threatening P - Kt4, ch, followed, after K -B5, by K — Kt2. Previously this would have been bad because White could have continued with P ~ K6. 4. K — Bd! After this move the advance of Black’s Knight’s pawn would be immediately fatal because of the reply K — B6. ee P-—R5 5. P-R4 R -KB8 If 5....P-~R6, then 6. RR —-R7, R—-QR8; 7. P—K6, P xP, ch; 8.K xP (threatening R-—R8, mate), K-—Ktl; 9. K -Q5, P-R7; 10.K-B4 and White wins since the Black Rook cannot make an attacking move and the advanced pawn is lost after K — Kt3. 6. P-KB4 R~-B6 \ 7,P—B4! If Black now takes the Knight’s pawn, then White’s King comes up to the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn wa K4 and conducts it on to queen. ee R -K6 8. P-—Kt4 P—R6 9.R-R7 K - Ktl If 9.... R -QB6, then after 10. P—K6, PxP, ch; 11. KxP (threatening mate) White protects the passed pawn by K — Q5. 10. P—Kt5 PxP 11.RPxP R —- QB6 12. P—Kt6 This frees the path of the King’s pawn, which now decides the game. 12 sce P xP, ch 13.KxP R — Kt6, ch 14. K — Bd R — QB6 15. R — R8, ch K — B2! Naturally the Black King does not allow himself to be driven away from the passed pawn. If White plays 16. P — K6, ch, then there'follows 16... K-K2; 17. R-Ri, ch, K-BI; 18. R-B7, ch, K-Ktl; 19. R-R7, K-B1 and White gets no further. 16. R - R7, ch K —Ktl THE END-GAME 87 Naturally 17. P—K6 would now be effectively answered by 17.... K-Bl. 17. K — K6! The decisive move. White offers the sacrifice of the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn in order to force the King away and turn the King’s pawn to advantage. | iy See RxP 18. R — R8, ch K —~R2 19. P-B5 R — B6 There would be no point in giving check since it would merely drive the King into a more favourable position, e.g. 19.... R — B3, ch; 20. K -Q7, R-B4; 21. K -Q6. 20. K — Q7 R — Q6, ch 21. K —-K7 R —Q4 22. P ~ K6! RxP 23. K —-Q6 R —B3! Or 23....R-—B8; 24, P—K7, R—Q8, ch; 25. K -B5, R - K8; 26. P -K8(Q), Rx Q; 27. R xR and the White King comes to KKtl1 and so holds up the Knight’s pawn. 24. K — Q7! Not 24.K-—K5 because of 24....R—B6; 25. P -K7, R-K6, ch; 26.K-—-Q6, P-R7!; 27.RxP, R-Q6, ch; 28.K —~B7, R-K6; 29.K-—-Q7, R-Q6,ch; 30. K —K8, P -Kt4. 24. .... K — Kt3 25. P - K7 R — B2 26. K — Q6 RxP 27.K xR K — B4 A new and difficult phase of the ending. White can win only by obtaining the Opposition on a rank. 28. K -Q6. (See diagram on next page.) 28 t4 29. K - Q6 K -B5 29....P—Kt5 would be inferior because of 30. R — B8, ch, K -Kt4; 31. K — K4. 30. K —- Q4 P — Kt5 31. R - B8, ch K ~ Kt6 88 THE END-GAME 32. K —K3 P-—R7 33. R —-QR8 K —R6 34. Rx P P -—Kt6 35. K — B3 and wins. Position after White’s 28th move No. 96 za a io © @ Heo & a ees ae 1 Hee & ue ee At the 28th move (see diagram above) Black could, instead, have tried 28....K —K5. Then there would have followed: 29. R — R4, ch! In order either to capture the Rook’s pawn with check or to drive back the King. a a ne ane eo 2 & “ee ‘\ a ie a Bemen . 2 8 oe se \ 29). sts: K — B4 30. K — Q5 P-Kt4 31. RxP K — Bd 32. K —- Q4 P-Ktd 33. R — R8! K — B6 34. K - Q3 P —Kt6 (See diagram No. 96.) This 18 the critical position in such endings. The move is decisive. If the player with the Rook is to move, he wins; if the other, he draws. 35. R — B8, ch K - Kt7 36. K - K2 K -R7 37. R- KKt8 P - Kt7 Or 37.... 38. K —- B2 K — Kt7;' 38. R —-Kt7, K —-R7; 39. K — B3 and wins. K - R8 THE END-GAME 89 In order to be stalemated after R x P? 39. R —R8, mate. If in the critical position (diagram No. 96) Black is to move, he forces a draw by P-—Kt7 followed, after R~KKt8, by K — B7. Knight endings, z.e. those in which besides the Kings there are only Knights and pawns on the board, generally take a very dramatic and, indeed, exciting course, much more so than Rook or Bishop endings. In those one can easily make a hostile passed pawn harmless by means of the long-range picce, or, at “-aat, keep it under observation or, if the worse comes to the wots, “revent the arrival of a new Queen by sacrificing the piece. On the other hand, the Knight, with its more limited ‘ange of action, has much more difficulty in fighting against 1 hostile passed pawn. To begin with, it takes many more noves to draw near to and hold up the passed pawn. And, if t succeeds in doing so, the enemy King has only to attack it to place it in the most difficult position. For since it cannot sacrifice itself and so prevent the worst, the threat of a new Queen still exists. These considerations are splendidly illustrated in the following end-game (No. 97). At the same time, we can learn from it how to make our understand- ing and conduct of many end- games considerably easier if we mdo not work out the moves but simply count them. In this way it is Isuch easier to ascertain which vu. the players will first obtain a Queen. We must not, however, fail to note which plever has the move at the damning of a series and also igther or not, in the event of ath sides queening a pawn, a atastrophe (e.g. loss or ex- fee of Queen, etc.) may not overtake the one queening last. The play was: | eee K -— Q4 No. 97 90 THE END-GAME With this move Black allows his opponent a free hand on the King’s side in order that he, himself, may turn to advantage the pawn majority on the Queen’s. 2. K — B4 P~-B5 Naturally this pawn must be taken at once or else its advance is immediately decisive. 3. PxP, ch Kt xP The outcome of this proffered exchange of Knights must be calculated——or counted—by each player with the utmost pre- cision. After 4. Ktx Kt, K x Kt White could capture the King’s Rook’s pawn and afterwards advance his own to queen. But this play would be very faulty: you see White would need three moves with the King and five with the pawn, making eight in all, whereas with much less expenditure of time, with only six moves, he could carry out this plan more efficiently This he could do by playing first P —- R4 and then P — Kt4 (not in the reverse order for then after P —-Kt4 Black by playing P ~R5 would prevent White from getting the passed pawn). How many moves are necessary here? P-—R4 is the first, P — Kt4 the second, P x P the third and then three more pawn moves to follow. Altogether, then, after the exchange of Knights this mancuvre costs six moves. (If Black makes a faulty reply to P — Kt4 and loses a move by P x P?, then White needs only five moves. Admittedly there are actually six but one of them is neutralised by Black’s faulty move P x P? wt ch does nothing to further the advance of a passed pawn by Black. In such end-game combinations I always subtract from players ‘‘tempo-account”’ the moves which his opponent either is forced to lose—e.g. in replying to a check—or loses as a result of his actions.) f Now what is Black doing during these six moves? He must, naturally, aim at creating a passed pawn as soon as possible. If he plays K-Kt5 and then K xP, he commits the very mistake which I have previously mentioned in dealing with White’s play. That is to say, he takes seven moves to queen a pawn, either two with the King and five with the Knight’s pawn or three with the King and four with the Rook’s pawn, whereas by a method analogous to that previously outlined for White, he saves time, if, instead of moving the King, he advances the Knight’s pawn at once. For then he needs only THE END-GAME 91 ve moves, viz. P—Kt4, P-Kt5?, P—Kt6, etc., or better >_Kt4, PxP!, P—R6, etc. If, after P—Kt4, White plays > P, then, in spite of having to recapture with the King and till make four pawn moves, Black again needs only five moves all since the King’s move is neutralised by the waste of time ae White has committed by playing P x P. .us we see that after the exchange of Knights White needs six moves to make a new Queen, Black only five. But in this series it is White’s first move, and after Black has made a Queen on his fifth move, White can immediately make a Queen. But this new Queen of his at his KR8 is immediately captured by Black’s at his QR8. (For this reason it was necessary for Black to queen at QR8 and not at QKt8 and, therefore, as mentioned above, P x P! was better than P —- Kt5.) From these fairly complicated considerations, which, nevertheless, are considerably simplified by the counting method, we sce that White must not make the exchange of Knights. 4. Kt - Ktl Other moves of the Knight are no better. As. es Kt - Kt7 The Knight can well go off after plunder even though, in so doing, it gets so far away from White’s King’s Rook’s pawn. It can get back in time to KB] where it will hold up that pawn. For this forced march it needs only three moves, the first to QR5 (Kt x P) the second to QB4, the third to K3 (which move it has gratis because of the check it gives) and after that again the third move—to KB1. White, however, needs four moves, viz? P-R4, P-Kt4, Px P and P—-R6 to advance his pawn to KR6. 5. Kt - B3, ch K — B5 6. P-R4 White now resolves to sacrifice his Knight. This is actually his best chance, as we shall see later. If he moves the Knight, then Black captures the Queen’s Rook’s pawn, holds up the other Rook’s pawn and wins easily with his united passed pawns. Bs sate Kt — Q6, ch Black could transpose moves here by taking the Knight at once and then giving this check. On the other hand, by capturing 92 THE END-GAME the Queen’s Rook’s pawn (after K x Kt) he would make the win more difficult. 7. K—B5 K x Kt 8. P-Kt4 We see that White counter-chance rests on the possibility of this break-through, which, in any case, gives him a passed pawn. This possibility would not have arisen if the Black King’s Rook’s pawn had been at R2 or R3. We can conclude, then, that the advance of that pawn to R4 was faulty, unless it carried with it some compensatory advantage. As a general rule, you should not advance your pawns on a side on which you wish to remain on the defensive, since by so doing you meet your opponent half way, in the truest sense of the word. 8... PxP i Certainly White can now advance his pawn to queen but Black’s King’s Knight’s pawn queens also and then Black, with his superiority of a Knight and pawns, wins easily. 9,K xP Kt — K4, ch 10. K — Bd Kt —- Kt3 11. P-R5 K —Kt5 12. K — B6! Position after White’s 12th move zs % 2 Vy » ys YY ey the Yih ee Kt - Rl! By this move, piquant in its very ugliness, Black wins, whereas by the more obvious Kt ~ Bl he would let victory slip from* his grasp. For after 12....Kt-—Bl; 13. K xP he could not THE END-GAME 93 give up the Knight at Bl without losing the game! White then would need four moves to get a Queen—K x Kt and the three pawn moves—while Black would need five—P — Kt4, P xP, P —B6, etc. or, if after P - Kt4 White played P x P, then K x P (a free move because of the opponent’s previous loss of a tempo) followed by the four pawn moves. Admittedly, at the beginning of this series it is Black’s move and, therefore, after White has queened on his fourth move, he could immedi- ately queen in histurn. But this Queen would be captured by ‘the hostile one. It follows, then, that the sacrifice of the Knight at KB1 would be bad and Black’s only alternatives (after White’s 14. K x P) would be (1) to play the Knight to R2 and move it away from further attacks (e.g. 15. K — Kt7, Kt -Kt4; 16. K -Kt6, Kt-K3; 17. K-B6, Kt-Bl) with a.sraw as the result or (2) to sacrifice it at R2, thus forcing «White to make an extra move with his King. After 14. K x P, Kt-R2; 15.K-—Kt7? White needs five moves to queen (K x Kt, K —Kt8! and the three pawn moves). Black, as I have shown previously, needs the same number, if he begins with P — Kt4, or six, if he captures the Rook’s pawn and then advances his Knight’s pawn. He can allow himself this last time-wasting line of play since at the beginning of the series (after 15. K — Kt7) it is his move and, therefore, after White queens on his fifth move, he can immediatcly queen in his turn. In either case, however, the game is a draw. 13. K —- Kt7 P -—B4 Black takes five moves in all to queen this pawn. White also takes five moves to queen but then Black has the move and can force the exchange of Queens. Another winning line was 13....P-—Kt4; 14. PxP, K xP, again queening in five moves and exchanging Queens, and then winning with the Bishop’s pawn. 14. K x Kt P- BS 15. P—-R6 P—B6 16.P—R7 P-B7 17. K ~Kt8 P ~ B8 (Q) 18. P—R8 (Q) Q - B65, ch and Black forces the exchange of Queens; if K ~ R7, by a check on the file, if K — Kt7, by a check on the diagonal, or, if K — B8, by one on the rank. * 04 THE END-GAME In this end-game (No. 98) White has an extra pawn on the King’s side. But it would be premature to make use of this at once by P-KKt3 and P—KR4. Since that can be done No. 98 a “me . GZ at any time, it should be the last rather than the first attempt to win the game. The play was, therefore: 1. Kt -Q5 Kt — B5 had to be prevented. ee P —-Kt4 Black wants to exchange as many pawns as possible, in order to have a chance of sacrificing his Knight, if necessary. 2.K -B2 Kt — Q5 3. Kt -K3 K - K3 4.K-Kl White now prepares to offer the exchange of Knights by Kt -—B2. Naturally, with only Kings and pawns on the board, the ending would be much easier to win. : ey P-R4 5. K —-Q2 P—R5 6. Kt — B2 Kt — B3 7. Kt-Kl Kt — Q5 Now White must not play 8. Kt — B3, for Black by exchanging Knights would obtain a draw since his King would prevent the White one from penetrating to KKt4 or the King’s Rook’s THE END-GAME 95 pawn from advancing: 8. Kt-B3?, Kt x Kt, ch!; 9. Px Kt, ‘K -B3; 10. K-K3, K-Kt3; 11. K-B2, K-R3!; 12. K- Kt3, K —-R4; 13. P—R3, P —-QKt5! and White gets no further forward. 8. K -K3 K - B3 9. Kt - B3 Kt - K3 10. P-KKt3 To prevent Kt — Bd. LO: sis Kt —- Bl 11. Kt -Ktl The Knight, which is splendidly posted at K B3 since by attack- ing two weak pawns it immobilizes the enemy King, now plans to go to QB3. Pl cicss Kt - QZ 12. Kt - K2 P- QKtd This prevents Kt — B3, but leaves a hole at Black’s QB5 which White’s Knight at once seeks to occupy. 13. Kt - Ktl Kt — Kt3 14. Kt — B3 The apparently aimless moving to and fro of this Knight has decided the issue of the end-game. For if Black’s Knight now plays to Q2, White continues with Kt —- Q2 and Kt — B4 and the Black Knight cannot move without allowing Kt — Kt6; which wins another pawn. If Black moves his King (instead of moving the Knight from Q2), the two Knights are as good as eliminated and White can—at last—turn his extra pawn to account by the continuation K —B3, K—R4! (the King having in the meantime gone to Kt3); P—- Kt4, ch, K —R3 or Kt3 (not K - R5 because of the threatened mate by K —- Kt2, Kt — Q2 and Kt - B3); K —- Kt3 followed by P - KR4 and the forcing of the advance of the King by Kt — Q2 and Kt — B3. 14. .... P - Bd A last attempt. White must not take since after Kt x P, ch he would lose the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. 15. P-Q4! If this pawn is captured, the King retakes and then his advance 96 THE END-GAME decides the game (15....PxP,ch?; 16.KxP followed by Kt — Q2, etc.). 15..:4 P — B6 16. P xP, ch K —Kt3 17.PxP P—Kt6é 18.PxP PxP If, instead of this, the Rook’s pawn advances, then the Knight can hold it up just in time by playing via K1 or Q4 to QB2. 19, Kt — Q2 P -Kt7 See how carefully one must play, even with victory in sight! Now it is Black who threatens to win!—by Kt — B65, ch. 20. K — Q3 K — B2 21. K —- B2 K —K3 22.K xP KxP 23. K —- B2 Even now White has to play very carefully. After 23. P — B4, Black by playing 23.... Kt x P, ch, followed by K x P and an attack on the remaining pawns, would get some—if only faint —drawing chances. 23. .... Kt — Q2 24. K —-Q3 Kt — B4, ch 25. K —-K3 Kt —- K3 26. Kt — B3, ch K —- B3 27. P — K5, ch K — Kt3 If 27.... K - B4, then the Knights are exchanged by 28. Kt — Q4,ch, Kx P; 29. Kt x Kt, ete. 28. K —-K4 Now White wins easily since his King conducts the passed pawns on their journey. kkk PART 3 THE MIDDLE GAME TYPIicaAL MIDDLE-GAME COMBINATIONS AND ATTACKS. THE EXPLOITATION OF MISTAKES is the predominating factor, the Middle Game, which follows it without any sharp line of demarcation, is the time of tactical manceuvres and attacks, of combinations, more or less hidden, and of the exploitation of mistakes. The Middle Game is chess in excelsis, the most beautiful part of the game, in which a lively imagination can exercise itsclf most fully and creatively in conjuring up magnificent com- binations. In a well-planned game these appear quite auto- matically; it is often possible to reduce them to certain simple types and therefore you can train your imagination, you can learn to combine by making these constantly recurring manoouvres the object of your study, as we hope to do in the following pages. The essential for the student is to play over and study again and again what he has learned until it becomes part of his very self. Then the most brilliant Queen sacrifice ,will come quite naturally to him, since in the maze of com- tplications he will always be able to find his signpost, the ‘familiar type. \ * * Wise: in the Opening far-seeing gencral strategy PINNING One of the most frequent and most dangerous forms of attack is the pin. A piece that moves in a straight line (i.e. Queen, Rook or Bishop) attacks a piece which cannot escape by flight without exposing a more important piece, Rook, Queen or King, standing behind it in the line of attack. The pinned piece must thus stand still and is then exposed to further attacks from pieces and, more especially, pawns. The eae type of this combination arises from a position like o. 99 Black’s King and “anight are on the same file. This makes possible the attack 1.R—-—K1 which at the same time pins 97 H 98 THE MIDDLE GAME the Knight, for it cannot move away without exposing the No. 99 he oka n ae a e, 4G JC fg sae a, Ga “4 o Gus No. 100 J J J * gw NI \\ SS ~S King to check. It must therefore be guarded by 1.... P-—Q4 and is then captured after 2. P — Q3. * The primitive type of the pin on a diagonal is quite analogous (No. 100). White attacks the Knight by 1.B-—Kt2 and at the same time pins it for it cannot move without exposing the King. Black’s only guarding move is 1.... K ~B3, whereupon White attacks the pinned Knight again by 2. P — B4 and so wins it. * In position No. 101 the play was 1... R-K1, 2.R — Q] (natur- Alb ally the advance of the King’s pawn was an alternative). Now the Knight cannot safely capture the pawn since it would be pinned by 3. R-K1 and so a piece would be lost. In such positions salvation is possible only when the Knight can either givea check (e.g.at B6,if White’s King were at KKt1) or prepare to give one (e.g. if in the posi- tion after the pin Black’s Rook were at K3, instead of at Kl, then the Knight could saveitself THE MIDDLE GAME 99 by the elegant retreat to Kt3 for then, if White played R xR, Black would win Bishop and Rook by Kt xB, ch, etc.). ¥ No. 102 shows a typical pinning attack. After 1.... Kt x P; 2.Q xP (Q-KB4 is better), Q-B6,ch the Bishop must ae 2 ¢ od oA Pr vv, YE t Wl A 4 WU, 4 Wy play into a pinned position at B2, whereupon it is further attacked by 3....R—-KBI; 4. Q—-—B5, Kt — Kt5 and is lost. * In position No. 103 White plays 1. QR-Q1. By this move he threatens absolutely nothing since everything is guarded. Therefore cannot Black at last complete his development by castling? No, for then he loses a piece by the continuation 2.Q xB, P «<Q, 3.RxQ. The Rook had pinned the Queen’s pawn! So always be mistrustful of the massing of hostile pieces in the same line A as your Queen! Away with her UY, & 4 { — } Wa y ae w, 5 out of that line! 1.... Q —-Kt2! yy : Yy ¥ V7, Yt 4, Uy 7 The play in position No. 104 is very similar. In this position Black is in no danger, but if, actuated by the understandable desire to de- 100 THE MIDDLE GAME velop, he moves his Bishop, then he loses a pawn by 2. Kt x P, PxKt; 3.BxB. By moving the Bishop to an unguarded square, he pinned the pawn himself. * No. 105 is a pinning position which occurs very frequently. White plays B ~ KR6, threatening mate at Kt7. take the Bishop without exposing his King. No. 105 wy, Gig Black cannot He must guard No. 106 oL Z a ZY “A A the mate by playing P — KKt3, and after B x R he has lost the Iixchange. * In position No. 106 White plays the attacked Queen to R3 where it is directed against the hostile King. Thus it pins the No. 107 veo 7 % " 7 tthe, 5 5: Sie. oe gk Z Z e va: oi Wepre Gea ts A he e a LEE, te f 7 King’s Bishop’s pawn, and so Kt x Pis threatened. You must not overlook such a _ hidden threat! After each of your opponent's moves you must above all ask yourself “What is threatened?’’ The simplest way to parry the threat is for Black to move the King off the diagonal along which the Queen is attacking. * In position No. 107 Black has already cramped his opponent’s game. White plays 1. Q -B3. THE MIDDLE GAME 101 The Queen is on the same file as the opposing King—this always threatens danger, no matter how many men may be standing in between. Here there is only one, the pawn, which thus is pinned so that the Knight’s pawn has lost its protec- tion and can be captured by the Bishop. The simplest parry to 1.Q-B3 is 1.... K-— Kt2. Such positions and their possibilities the student must always bear closely in mind. Even more experienced players occasionally overlook such a threat. * Position No. 108 is analogous in type. No. 10s No. 109 The play was 1....Q-B5. The Quccn in the same line as the opposing one—-that spells danger! The Qucen’s Bishop’s pawn is pinned, and consequently the Knight is insufficiently guarded. To parry the threat White must move his Queen away—not to Q2 in the same line as the enemy Rook (for then P ~ QB4 would win the Knight, Q — K2 in reply being unavail- ing), and not to K2 or Kt3 (because then R x Kt destroys the Queen’s support and wins a piece)—but to B2. ¥ In position No. 109 White played 1.Q-—Kt3. The Queen on the same diagonal as the opposing King is always alarming. White threatens 2.PxP. Black would like to reply with 2.... KP x P and so round off his pawn position. Incidentally too, 2.... BP x P would allow the attack 3. Kt-QKt5. But after 2.P xP, KP xP the Queen’s pawn is pinned by the 102 THE MIDDLE GAME Queen and in consequence the Knight at Black’s K5 is only once guarded and White by exchanging it wins a pawn. The simplest parry is to move the King off the same diagonal as the hostile Queen, 7.e. 1.... K—RIl. *% Very frequently a pin is brought about by a sacrifice (No. 0) Ll... RxB!; 2. KtxR, Kt-—Q5 and the Knight is lost since it cannot move without expos- ing the Queen. Thus Black obtains the superiority of two minor pieces against a Rook. ¥ In No. 111: 1.... R(R3) — K3; 2. K-B3?, RxP!; 3. RxR, B-B3; 4. R-K1, P—B4 and Black wins back the Rook, thus gaining a pawn. ¥ No. 112 is again a sacrifice to bring about a pin. 1. RxP!, RxR; 2.QxP. The pinned Rook is doubly attacked and can be further guarded only No. 11] j a ma ca . mveZe cae w2e © by 2....Q- -Q3. Thereupon, however, a catastrophe follows by 3. Q-R8, ch, K-B2; 4.R xR, ch, ete. 103 Q — B4, and it cannot be further THE MIDDLE GAME guarded by P-—K4 for then there would follow QP, ch. Therefore after Q — B4 Black attempts a counter-attack on the In position No. 113 Black has just made the bad mistake of pinning his Knight by making a capture with it at his Q5. White attacks it again by “ ei Ts at Boi ‘ SO — No. 114 ae ; -_< wal Bee aml le 3 ow ofoone Sam He eee No. 113 \N WSN ees a SS me on ® Wy mi CO nae NN a \\ WWE S ‘ EN Dy B x KtP?, sacrifices the No. 115 * Knight Thus White has QxR_ the is pinned and White can play 3. Kt x B without Black being * Position No. 114 also shows a sacrifice to bring about a pin. able to retake. White plays 1. P -KKt4 and, if 1... Queen by Kt -K3. But the Queen saves herself by checking exchange by 2. Rx B! so that at QR4 and Black’s Queen, interposing at B3, is pinned by B — QKt5 and won. aps Op sl am PR of Ru BR 7 as 2g : 4 9 "9 NN oO Wn 3 rr 8 g 4a © eek ea] m ots BSZseda a | Ze) eo) i -n Cm RS Oo S95 8RS a Megas - NSS Oo 4 MAH onal Si, xX ms axso'd . -¢g POs O-4 SES 7 be ey 4 gas ° 2 ie OM OP HSE eA se a, a |g 2 Oo of .2 438 oa tk et So:s abe —~EBEMes23 won two minor pieces for a after 2.... Rook. SS tal a “a 104 THE MIDDLE GAME Black had no Queen’s pawn or King’s Bishop’s pawn But, as itis, after 3....Kt xB, 4. K x Kt this Bishop is pinned and s0 is won by 4....P -Q4 or P-B4. * Position No. 116 shows a sacrifice to bring about a pin: 1... Q xR, ch', 2.QxQ, R-B8, 3.QxR, BxQ. By means of No 116 GY Ud UB a “Yt YY tp Vd, fe “Yug Y Y Us, YY this pretty exchanging combination Black prevents the possi- bility of any counter-attack and wins easily. ¥ Position No. 117 also shows a sacrifice with a pin to follow, which here results in the win of a Queen. A frequently occur- ring combination, which must be seen! 1.... Kt x P!, 2.P x Kt, R-Kt3 and Black wins the Queen. No 118 * Position No. 118 shows the same combination in another form: 1. R(K1)-K3, R- KKtl? (K — Kt2 should be played), 2.RxB!,PxR; 3.R- B3 and White wins the Queen. * THE MIDDLE GAME 105 In position No. 119 Black gets an advantage by an attack along the open King’s file. i... R-Klch; 2. Kt-—K2 (it No 119 would be better to forgo cast- Ww Meats WY ling by playing K —Bl, for i —— é bs the pinning of the Knight is very gon yy Zz “ soap tae and Pag! fT - — Sw Wy Wy to the loss of that piece) “4% QYyarY B x Kt, ch, 3. P x B, Q — R5, ch; a Je Y, WY 4,P—-Kt3 (better — although AZ Yl Tt: Vi, \ still to Black’s advantage— VY GA zg YY; would be 4.Q-B2, Q-R4; RERG Y; i, 4 RP Do 5. K —- Bl), B -Kt5d! (if now Y, Hie 4 5 PxQ,then5...BxQandthe = oy Knight 1s still lost), 5. Q - B2, Q — K2 (or else to R4) and Black wins the Knight. In position No. 120 by 1.R-—K1, B-K3, 2.P-Q5, PP; 3. Kt -Q4. White wins the Bishop 1.... B-—_K5 would be even worsethan 1....B-—-K3on account of 2. Bx B(or else Kt x B) for Black could not recapture without losing his Queen after 3. Rx P. No. 120 No. 121 Yj, Wh ty, b, Yt Z, Z Ni GeO © Niger & w *o & @t vax YES yy, VF 4,” ake t Day, BB tt a a by CMG; BY Yi gj B&D | th BBL Gh ie @ 4, za Ze le Boll val WA m dt, A yy Me fe y ? BMP, BBR B Wi, BRE Awwe wat kk wee ee 7 i te WAR You must always be careful when your King and Queen are standing on the same file, rank or diagonal! The loss of the Queen—or at least a dangerous pin—may easily result. In position No. 121 White could easily have defended the 106 THE MIDDLE GAME attacked Queen’s pawn, e.g. by playing R-Ql1. However, he preferred to sacrifice it in order to involve his opponent in a disastrous pin. The play was: 1. R-B1, Kt x P?; 2. B x B,ch, KxB; 3.Q-—Q5,ch, Kt-—B3. Now Black threatens to relieve the pin by playing K -Kt3. 4. P-QR¢#! is calculated to prevent this. For, if 4....K—Kt3, then 5. P— R85, ch, which either drives the King back or, if the pawn is taken, leads to mate or the loss of the Queen by 5.... Kt xP; 6. R x Kt, K xR; 7. R — B6 (cutting off the King’s retreat and threatening 8. Q -R2,ch, K —-Kt5; 9. Q —- R3, mate), K — Kt5 (the only alternative to sacrificing Queen for Rook); 8. Q - R2, QxR; 9.Q-—R3,ch, K-B5; 10.Q-—B3, mate. If after 5. P—R5, ch the King goes back to Kt2, then the attack on the pinned Knight is continued by 6. R — R3! (threatening to attack the Knight a third time by R(R3) —-QB3), P— Kt5; 7. R —-QKt3 (or R4) and Black cannot prevent R xP, ch fol- lowed by the loss of the Knight. (If he moves the King, then, naturally, the Knight is captured at once. An ingenious de- fence would be 7....QR-QKtl. After 8. R xP, ch?, K-R2 or Bl White could not take the Knight without losing the Rook at Kt4. And, if, instead, he exchanged Rooks, then the threatened Knight would recapture. But by 8.R~x Kt, QxR; 9.RxP, ch, K-—R2; 10.QxQ White would win the Queen and after 10....R xR would have the decisive advant- age of Queen and Knight against two Rooks. After 4. P —-QR4! the threat is 5.P xP, PxP; 6. Q~xP, ch, with a catastrophe to follow. Black can attempt to parry this by PxPor P—Kt5. After 4....PxP; 5.R~xP (threatening to drive the King away from the Knight by R- Kt4, ch), K —Kt3 (if P -QR4?, then Q-Kt5, ch) White captures the Knight and, if Black recaptures, wins the Queen: 6. R x Kt, ch, QxR; 7.R-Kt4,ch, Q-Kt4; 8.RxQ,ch, PxR. He has then, once again, Queen and Knight against two Rooks. After 4.... P—-Kt5, however (instead of 4....P xP), 5. P-R5 followed by 6. R-—R4, as in a continuation previously ex- amined, leads most simply to the goal. Instead of this, the bringing up of the Knight would also force a win but in a more complicated fashion: 5. Kt—-Q2, KR-KKtl; 6. Kt-—Kt3 (threatening Kt -.R5, ch), K -Kt3; 7. Rx Kt, ch (or win of the Knight by 7.P-R5,ch, K-Kt2; 8. Kt-Q4), QxR; 8. Q-Q4, ch, K-—Kt2; 9. Kt-—R5, ch, winning the Queen. Black could, however, prolong the game by the desperate THE MIDDLE GAME 107 counter-attack: 6....R x P, ch (instead of K —-Kt3); 7. K xR, Q — Kt5, ch, 8. K—Bl1!, Q-R6, ch, 9. K-K1. Position No. 122 also shows a sacrifice to bring about a pin. The play was: 1....B—R7, ch?; 2. K-Bl, KtxP?, 3.Q~xP, ch!, R x Q (if 3.... K -R1, then 4.Q x R mate), 4.R —K8, mate. This brilliant and surprising continuation, Q x KBP, ch and R - K8, mate, occurs fairly frequently, therefore you must be fully conversant with it. Black had the right idea but his execution was faulty. A No 122 No. 123 Uti, by Yc y Vi i We U7, ty ajay Mey [TRIE Y “yy 4 Y; Vs Yh, Z Ce eo Ba Angelis, US y tL, j Yea: Yon jlh Up 19 81 © (aM cae a CG fl U4 f f SLAY VY b4 Yj Yyyy a Y GY AN OE: f ty, Fem Ga / Wi YM WN \~ Dopp Do» NS YA slight transposition would have given him much better chances: 1.... Kt x P!, 2.Qx Kt, B—R7, ch!, 3. K-—Bl (otherwise the Queen is unguarded), B-— Kt6 for now 4.QxP, ch would be a terrible mistake since the Rook would capture the Queen with check. Position No. 123 shows a combination very similar to the fore- going. After 1... P—Q4; 2. B-—Ktl apparently everything is guarded. But by 2....BxKt,ch, 3.QxB the Queen is forced into a pinned position and now the Rook is unguarded. After 3....R xR, ch all is over. In position No. 124 the pin which exists after 1. Kt — K5!, QxB, 2.QxB,ch, Q-Kt4 makes possible the pretty coup- White wins the Queen or (if 3.... Q x Q) THE MIDDLE GAME de-grdce 3. R-Ktll. mates by 4.R xR. 108 7 Se WW WS N SS N wet St a =. SS “Os nS ‘\N\ \we oe ce N S S SS Ree WS \\ Rea Be Baie di a mime Tl can save 3. Kt xR, P—KkKt4 and Black obtains the advantage of two minor pieces against a Rook. \~ SEA : SS ReSN Si Ks SAN Bee No. 124 No. 126 <9) fe @O an ort 9 o = vs AMY WW: PS WY WWW 3 re WAYNE WEE WW REAR oOo N \ oe] Re SS WSs as a a SAY NS se 5 S| ci OE) eae Sl mies sboise St Sar WN 45] WN a | ian ww I | Keo mc it | OE i N \ WN ay SY AY Re WS \\ 1 | i Blea 2" B wecd i \N N SS S WN WW SSS oui wa eet os gos ag 8 = os ‘oo oa OS \\ Ne eal} wn WNW al PY NX : \\ SSSss SSS 7 \N SE! ni eu o * fmt nw o NS \\ RS NS SS py RN W s mes Se e = N. ® \X \\ WS » ae ee |e S : SS Nee 2 <= AS \\ Qu ai N po | fea) a cl wee Ws : WSS SS RIS fo WS cos oo . SS WSS SS SS WN ‘ . SSS RSs BS Position No. 125 also shows a sacrifice to set up a pin: 1... P —K5; White from a decisive disadvantage naturally follows Q —B1 loses a piece by In position No. 126 the pin is produced not by a sacrifice 1.B-B6!, BxB (1... but by an exchange. The play is: THE MIDDLE GAME 109 2.KBxKt, Kt xB; 3.BxB, while after 1....R —Ktl White can play B x B and then by Kt -B6, Kt xB, ch and Kt xP win the Queen’s pawn, as in the main variation); 2. Kt x B, Q-K1; 3. KtxB,ch, QxKt; 4. Kt x P and White has won the most important pawn. In position No. 127 Black pins the Knight by 1.... B— QKt5, thus winning at least a pawn. For, if 2. P- R3, the most direct way of releasing the pin, Black plays 2....BxKt and then wins a pawn by 3....P xP, uncovering the Rook on to the Queen. The actual play was 2.BxKt,QxB. If White now attempts to avoid the threatened loss of a pawn by playing 3. R-QI1, then Black continues the attack on the pinned Knight by 3....P x Pand after 4. B x P attacks the support of the Knight by 4....B-B7, whereupon White’s situation is critical. If the Rook moves, then naturally the Knight is taken. If, instead, White breaks the pin by playing 5. Kt — K4, attacking the Queen and also the Bishop, then the former retires to K2, White’s Queen and Rook are still attacked and after 6. Q — K2! he loses at least the Exchange at his QI. In position No. 128 Black has just played his Queen to QKt3. There she is attacking along both the file and the diagonal. Along the file she threatens the Queen’s Knight’s pawn, while along the diagonal a. Le ey wa No. 128 she, admittedly, is attacking Ui: nothing that isnotwellguarded. Z& But she is looking beyond EY White’s Queen’s pawn at the UY Wy Yy , Wy unguarded Bishop at his K3. an “se fy ; Thus she pins the Queen’s pawn, Win, Too,» Gy, te which, therefore, cannot make ZY Ay Yy a capt t White’s K5 with- Uy » Uy: & YG & GY pture at W BGS RY Yj g ZY | Ze out exposing the Bishop. Thus gw ms Black these to win a pawn pal ave El ey by capturing twice at White’s K5 (1... KtxKt; 2. BPxKt, BxP; 3.PxB, Q~xB—or, similarly, 1....BxKt, etc.). White best parries the two threats, as nearly always, by the development of another piece, 110 THE MIDDLE GAME v.e. 1.Q-Q2. Now the Bishop at his K3 is guarded, while, if Black captures the Knight’s pawn, he loses his Queen after KR — Ktl. In position No. 129 White played 1. P-—Kt4?, whereupon after 1....P xP; 2. R x KtP a fatal pin in the Queen’s Bishop’s file resulted. The continuation was 2....P-—Q5; 3. B-Q2, QR-B1. White then attempted a counter-attack by 4. B —Q3 which Black parried—with an attack on the King’s Bishop’s pawn—by 4....Q-—B2. After 5. Kt -K4 Black by 5.... Kt — Q4 attacked the pinned Queen’s Bishop’s pawn again No. 129 No. 130 2 es yt wy, thi = tet yyy “ane 1 ow ye th G YD, 4, YY, aA &© fF ve 44224 Bre nn. Yy UY Gay yre"g Z% YG ow? me YA Re “i, i MRE eae se oe ge Wl, 4. Y iG ty af Yh Yr Yn : A: : ae Ley er % L, ST”, BERG RF] wi, ann Ht Y > y % 3 Mle YhtE VUE YY YH MEU 8 & je BET 7 and also the Rook, which could not move to Kt3 or B4 as it would then have been in the line of action of the Bishop at Black’s K3. In reply to the move actually played, 6. R — R4, Black won the pawn by 6....PxP. As White recaptured (7. B x P?), then, instead of a pawn, a piece was pinned at his QB3 and was at once lost: 7....KtxB; 8. KtxKt, P—K5 (opening up the Bishop at KKt2). In position No. 130 White, by attacking the Knight, either wins the pinned piece or forces an opening of the King’s Rook’s file, which secures him an irresistible King’s side attack. The play was 1. P—K5!, P x B (if P x P?, then R x Q); 2. P xP, ch, Kt —-R4; 3. Rx Kt, ch, Px R(or 3.... K -Kt2; 4. R—R7, ch, K xR; 5. Q-—R3, ch, etc., asin the actual game); 4. Q x P, ch, K —Kt2; 5. Q-—R6, ch (naturally not R—-R1 because of the THE MIDDLE GAME lll reply R — Rl, beating offthe attack), K - Kt1; 6.R —- R1 and the mate threatened at Black’s R2 or R1 could not be prevented. In position No. 131 White is several moves ahead in develop- ment and, as a result of Black’s next move (instead of which P — Q3 should have been played), obtains an opportunity for direct attacks, the chief objective being the pinned Knight at Black’s K3. The play was 1....P-B3, 2. QR-Q1 (pinning the Queen’s pawn and thus threatening to capture the Knight), Q —-K1; 3. Kt — Q5 (threatening to capture the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn), B —- QI] (K ~ Rl, to do away with the annoying pin, was No 13] No 132 Y 7 4 y, ty f a Ev Sw Wey He % Tee NWN a e SS NN bey AN tps p Vad & A K&R A 4 ‘ wt: as af,’ PS lore v{ eee, (ay hy, &@ the, FA A Gs, ty bh, oe (UG be, bo: by AX thay We U MAY, te Yr RA GEA: B RR RYE RS RY, Wo BEY g Gy GES” Ly We ORS somewhat better. After the text-move Black’s King’s side is broken up), 4. Px P, Px P, 5. B- KR6, R - B2, 6. KR —-K1, (now the Knight at K3 is pinned from two directions), Kt — K2 (if, instead, P — Q3, then the Knight would be attacked a fourth time by Kt —B4), 7. Kt -B4, Kt-KB4, 8. Q-Q2, Kt-Q3 (8...KtxB, 9. KtxKt would also have been to White’s advantage), 9.B-Kt3, P-R4, 10. Kt-Q4, R-K2, 1] Kt(Q4) x Kt (at last White strikes—and wins a pawn at his K6), P x Kt, 12 Kt x P (the pseudo-sacrifice typical of such positions), B x Kt (if 12....R x Kt, then by 13.RxR, BxR, 14 R-—K1 White either regains his piece or wins the Queen), 13.RxB,RxR, 14.R-—-K1,K-Rl; 15.R xR and by his systematic attack on the pinned Knight White has won a pawn. In position No. 132 White attacks the pinned Bishop a second 112 THE MIDDLE GAME time by 1. Kt-K5. Black guards it by 1.... KR-—QI1 and now, certainly, White cannot further strengthen the attack on the Bishop. But by 2. Kt xP he can win the Exchange. In position No. 133 White has at his disposal several ways of obtaining an advantage. One would be to exploit sys- tematically the obvious pin on the Knight at Black’s Q2 by playing 1. Kt—-K5, Kt(K5) -B3!; 2. KtxQBP which wins a pawn. (The guard by l.... R —-Q1 is even worse for Black, for then 2. Kt x QBP wins the Exchange). But in this posi- tion there is another pin which is not so obvious. It is based No 133 No. 134 Yi tf 4 Yd, St yr te, iy Rwieawiee, YA COTA % Y tf Yy Ss ae ae Y ty Z Yih Z 4 oP BY Le , Y ye 28 SL Sy Y ‘yyy Z Z% of Y % PSG % 4 4; . g ty MRL ia Bs ZG EES 7 AM Oke RAT wk upon the opposition of the Rooks in the Queen’s Bishop’s file. This opposition pins the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn since Black’s Rook at QB1 is indirectly attacked by its antagonist at White’s QB1. White, therefore, can play 1. Kt x P! and this is even stronger than 1. Kt-—K5. After 1...PxKt, 2.RxR, ch he has won the Exchange and a pawn If, instead, 1. .Q — Q3, then White wins a second pawn by the brilliant move 2. R x P!. Now Black’s Queen cannot well capture either the Rook or the Knight. If she captures the Rook, she is won by 3. Kt — K7, ch, if, instead, the Knight, by 3.RxR,ch. If 2..RxR, then there follows 3. Q xR, ch (better than Q x R), Kt — Ktl,andin addition to his advantage in material White has a good attack. In position No. 134 Black, in order to win the Queen’s pawn, carelessly plays 1....Q—R1 without taking into account the THE MIDDLE GAME 113 danger of the pin. After 2. Q -—K2, B x P? the Bishop is won by the splendid move 3. Q-—K4 which brings about a cross- pin. White’s Queen cannot be taken since his Bishop pins Black’s. If Black captures the Bishop, then his Queen is en prise. Black’s Bishop, however, is doubly attacked, cannot be guarded any more, and therefore is lost. In position No. 135 the play was 1.... Kt—R4, 2. Q-—Kt5 (in order to advance the passed pawn after 2....Q x Q; 3 BxQ), B-B3, 3. B-—K5! (again a very piquant case of double-pinning! Black’s Bishop cannot capture either Bishop No 135 No. 136 th 7% Wd, AY ‘4 oy Why Yj “ (OWT M @ EY Oo Vi; YW Vd Gf, iy At&t, W yp 'y. Be BR f MW f, Uf, GK, BE Atay & Uy b A f YTS Ye BWASOYG or Queen). The continuation was: 3... P-—B3, 4. B-QKt3, KR — K1 (QR - QI was better although after 5. Q —K3 White would have had the superior game), 5. R-Q7, Q-Bl, 6. R - KB7, Q x R (there was nothing better), 7.PxQ, R xB, 8. R x R and White won (if 8....BxQ, then 9. R —K8, ch). In position No. 136, after 1....R —Q1 White’s Knight is pinned, for, if it goes to B3, Black checks with his Queen at KB3 or KBI and then his Rook captures White’s Queen. If, instead, the Knight goes to B4, then Q x Q, ch wins a Rook. The Knight, however, cannot be guarded by P — K4 since this pawn is pinned by Black’s King’s Bishop which after P - K4 could capture the Rook. After 2. B —Kt2 the attack on the pinned Knight is continued by 2.... Kt —K2 and there is no satisfactory defence. Actually White attempted the counter- I 114 THE MIDDLE GAME attack 3. P-—KR¢4 in order, after 3.... B—B3?, to retire the Knight to B3 as then no check on the Bishop’s file would be possible. By this counter-attack he certainly saved the pinned Knight, but lost quickly on account of the weakness at his KKt3. The continuation was (instead of 3.... B—B3?) 3.... Kt x Kt (threatening to win the Queen by Kt xP, ch); 4.BxKt,BxKP; 5. R-—B3,QxP. Asthe Queen threatened mate at KB7 or KKt8, White had to give up the Exchange: 6.R xB, QxR, after which Black had a winning advantage in material. It would have been still worse for White if, at move 4, he had recaptured at his Q5 with his Queen (4. Q x Kt?) for there would have followed 4....R-—B1,ch. The Bishop could not interpose at B3 for then it would be pinned and would no longer guard the Queen. If 5. K—-Ktl, then 5....B xP, ch, followed by the exchange of Queens and the gain of the Rook. If 5. K—-K1, then 5....QxP, ch; 6. K -QI, R-QI1 and the Queen is pinned and threatened with capture. Admittedly by 7. R -B8, pinning the Rook, White can still save her, but only at the cost of the Rook which Black simply captures. After 7....R xR; 8. P xB there follows 8.... Q x KP, threaten- ing mate by either R-BS8 or Q-B8, and White loses his Queen, after 9.Q-Q2, by 9....Q-—Kt8,ch; 10. Q-K1, R — B8, ch!; or after 9. K -K1 by 9.... R —- B8, ch; 10. Q — QI, RxQ, ch. In this example we see a large number of pins occurring and playing an important part. DovusLE ATTACKS Among the most dangerous tactical manceuvres are double attacks. When one man attacks simultaneously two un- guarded men, then generally one of them is lost, unless one can so move that it guards the other or can save itself by a check or some other attack. All the men can make double attacks, but the Queen and Knight, however, are pre-eminent in this respect. The Knight can often attack as many as three or more men simultaneously. The most to be feared is the double attack of a Knight on a King and Queen. A number of examples of double attacks now follow. In position No. 137, by 1.Q-—K4 White attacks both Rook and Bishop and wins one of them. One sees how dangerous THE MIDDLE GAME 115 it is to expose one’s flank by P - QKt3 without developing the Bishop at QKt2 and how easily an unguarded Bishop at K2 falls a prey toa Queen. But one must see it! In position No. 138 White naturally must not capture the Knight for R -Q8, ch will be deadly. But after 1. Kt -Q3 the Knight and also the Bishop behind it are attacked. (To play Kt - B3 with the same object would be foolish, for after the reply P -KB4 White would have no chance of successfully continuing the attack.) Black guards the Knight by 1... P-—KBé4 and White systematically continues the attack by No. 137 No. 138 Y, 4 YSIS 444 a y a: YZ . ¢ % Ha @ J w Mi 2 ett La g Hh ¥ Yt ‘? - 7 y “4 c 5 . 4 a ” “4” 4 Y a i YU a 4 A ‘o 4 0 ‘o =, YW WY i c YELL YS iy ee ag yun MOG! 4 ‘i * 4, Aft, fy 4 Ki Ve (1 LY pena lt Sess Mitlyy %, 4 L, a G a SE 4, tats Ny yy Rig > eae LY Lae a Ng Pa 4, Yy, YY i oy igs 4 fe ¥ Zi thi | pap ts ei , C4 WUE, a ‘ 4 y 4 a vi 4 Vi res tind, , Z Yay Ce EZ, Vii Be Hipgs Uy, o a a> a CL 7% ‘i we ti lati, Toot, od eg ; Millie 5 Can, OS iberd? 7 4 44 4? BRS: 4, 4 yi ey, ead ia WM the Yy LG G om, Y oi, 2.P-KB3. If the Knight moves, then the Bishop is cap- tured. But Black can check with the Bishop at QB4 and so prevent the threatened loss of one of the pieces. If the King goes to Rl, then the Knight checks at KB7, and after the exchange of Knights the danger is past. If the King goes to Bl, then once more the two Black pieces are attacked. Now, however, White’s King stands on the same file as a hostile Rook and Black can take advantage of this to save himself. He moves the Bishop away to Kt3 in order to reply to P x Kt with Px P, ch attacking the Knight. Again a double attack —and a parry to White’s. White can certainly temporarily save the Knight by playing it to B4, but then it is attacked by P —-KkKt4 and captured, so that in the whole transaction Black has lost no more than the King’s pawn. But White has a better line of play. He can reckon all this out beforehand, and reply to 2.... B —B4, ch, with 3. Kt xB. 116 THE MIDDLE GAME Apparently, as a result of this, Black has got out of all danger— but only apparently! After 3....KtxKt White plays 4. B —-Kt5, attacking the Rook and at the same time threaten- ing to win at least the exchange by the double attack B - K7. This threat cannot be parried, for after 4....R —Q4; 5. B —K7, R-K1 or B2, White drives back the guarding Rook by 6. P —- QB4 so that, to avoid worse, Black must play R x B— all this the logical outcome of the unsafe position of his pieces. In position No. 139 White attacks the pawn at Black’s QB4 a second time by 1. Kt—K4. Black can now sacrifice a Bishop by 1....BxP, ch, No, 139 in order, after 2....Q —R5, ch, Gy Se Aide, to win the Knight for it—an VO Sy x B ig, exceptionally frequent double Y yee i z ey , attack. Here, however, it Uy a0 ty 4, would not be good for Black, for Uy “Wy after 1....BxP,ch; 2. K xB, ad a @ ix . Uy Vy Ys vy Q —R5, ch; 3. K —-Ktl, Q x Kt Ve Uo Wo Yo Write plays 4.BxP (double rs WN ber y Vr a ae; yy 4 ay, Wy attack on Queen and Rook) and fo Ly > SS S WS \ fr E g WN g ES after 4....QxQ, 5.RxQ has “> regained his pawn. He then & penetrates with his Rook to the seventh rank, where it is very well posted. Black, therefore, plays 1.... B —-Kt2 (instead of BxP, ch). If White now captures twice at Black’s QB4 by 2.KtxP?, BxKt, 3.BxB, then, after 3....Q—Kt4!, threatening both Q x P, mate and Q x B, he loses the Bishop. It would be better to make the first capture at Black’s QB4 with the Bishop, but after 2. Bx P, Bx B! (B x Kt would be bad on account of Bx B); 3. Kt xB Black would regain the pawn by 3.... Bx P!; 4. K xB, Q—-Kt4, ch (again a double attack) followed by 5....QxKt. Therefore, by 1....B-—Kt2 Black has indirectly guarded the pawn at his QB4. White’s best reply is 2 Kt xB by which, although he certainly im- proves Black’s pawn position, he removes one of the two Bishops which are so highly dangerous a threat to his King. NWN YN R 4 Zs In position No. 140 Black has just penetrated with his Rook THE MIDDLE GAME 117 from B1 to B7 and has driven the Bishop from K2 back to Bl. He is just on the point of capturing the unguarded Queen’s Rook’s pawn when he notices the spiteful double attack, B—B4, ch, which would cost him his Rook. Therefore: beware of every threat of check. ¥ In position No. 141 Black, by playing 1....Q — B6, attacks not only the Rook but also the Knight at KB3 which, too, is No. 140 No. 14] Ee, “e y ¢ a Yess th c——¢ Yip Y Way ‘OY Yee) “YY, Yo? YL “thy 4 Wa YWMhii A 4 4. (a % Ae wy, aA 4 a é way Y 7 s hth t, 4 pray VO “yyy lle! mms Clit eS ti), & Uh DY Hy “ip a z 3 Ys With, yep: tp Spf? Ui pp Ys 4 G24 “ee 4 a ty 74 Cte 4, the ty Mt “i ‘ype CAV ty ( Ay YY A JA. y kan a BEB Ye Way : 4, ty Vey wy Wa, ot YY os CE): unguarded since the Knight’s pawn is pinned by the Rook at Ktl. One of the two pieces is lost. If, however, the Black King were at Ktl, instead of at Bl, then nothing at all would be lost, for after 2. R-QI], Kl or KB], QxKt White would No.1 have at his disposal the power- ign pit At’ LL ful move 3.QxR, ch, which, fC py We rasa by compelling Black to play [42 & 77 Wi ; 2a 3.....R xR, would unpin the Knight’s pawn. A very fre- quent—and always surprising —manceuvre! * In position No. 142 Black, by penetrating with his Queen to KKt7, has attacked both Rook and Knight. Luckily the Knight, by playing to Kt3, can guard the Rook. (Not Kt-—B2, because the guard 118 THE MIDDLE GAME would be immediately destroyed by RxKt.) But after 1. Kt —- Kt3, Black by 1....QxKtP attacks both Bishop and Rook, and one of these two pieces is lost. ¥ In position No. 143 White plays 1. P-—K6?, whereupon Black by 1.... P —-Kt5 wins either Bishop or Knight. Yi Wy L Yi Bi td ‘o YY Z tYy La; ty, Y oa RRR BBB 2 BEV ly RY, BS In position No. 144 1....Q xP? is not infrequently played. In reply, White by 2. Kt x B, Px Kt; 3. Q-—R85, ch wins the Bishop. The correct move is 1.... Q — Q4. No. 146 Yt i pa UG, 4 he Vis Oh, poe nyt? Yee WG VA 2 _ “Ae Y AL 4 Sts doe they has 4 Me + Yigtit weeyl, ‘4, lly gy GANG LG 4 g a Ober. Yh a o 8 Bae In position No. 145 White by 1.Q-K2 wins either the Queen’s Rook’s pawn or the King’s pawn. But one must see it! This double attack is quite simple. The following example (No. 146) is more complicated: THE MIDDLE GAME 119 If Black moves his Bishop, a catastophe is threatened at White’s KKt2, 1.e. 2....R xP, ch; 2. K—R1, R—Kt8, mate. Therefore the Bishop must be moved—but to which square? To a place where it attacks something, t.e. to K7. There it attacks the Bishop and wins it, since White must guard against the mate before anything else. * In position No. 147 1. P —- B5 was played. After 1....KPxP (QP x P was better), there followed 2. P x QP and White had suddenly obtained two united passed pawns. In themselves No. 148 am. GY GY; Wry AG ty - Mew, A A 1G Y, TRY G Ya Va” wy they are almost irresistible, but here, in addition, each threatens a fork, viz. P—K6, ch and P -Q6. x Ui’ GAY 2 In position No. 148 White played 1. Kt - Q4?, which Black showed to be faulty by 1....BxKt!; 2.PxB, Q-Kt3! Now the Queen’s pawn could be guarded only by B — K3 which would abandon the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. ¥ A double attack is frequently brought about after a pre- paratory sacrifice. Generally the piece sacrificed is regained by the double attack, or some other advantage is obtained, as the following examples (Nos. 149and 150) will show. In No. 149 White played 1. Kt -Q3?, whereupon Black won a pawn by 1.... Bx P, ch!; 2. K xB, Q-R5, ch; 3. K-Ktl, QxB. As 120 THE MIDDLE GAME we have already remarked, when considering No. 139, this is a very frequently occurring manceuvre, since the mistake is made time and time again. Thus in position No. 150 the play was 1....P-—R3; 2. B-R4?, whereupon Black won No. 149 lead Si, A 7 7k q Uy “0 e No. 150 me % % Vi, ; Yj Zz While a pawn by 2....KtxQP; 3.PxKt, Q-—R85, ch, followed by QxB. You must see this, you must see this! % In position No. 151 Black thoughtlessly played 1.... P - B3. No. 151 nia & yay i BZ, Wi byt: “Y “tle 7, ng yyy j ths A ‘yd ug: GZ, Z % oe, LORY Yl het YY, tH Yay ZAR, 4 ag e% vy a Ys YR RR YS Soe Always consider whether the move you are thinking of making will expose youtoacheck! Here Q — B4, ch can be played, at- tacking the Knight which is al- ready threatened by the Bishop over the Knight at White’s Q4. Black’s mistake, in this par- ticular case, is exploited in the following way: 2. Kt x P!, Px Kt; 3.Bx Kt (not Q- B4, ch, for then the Knight saves itself by playing to K3!), BxB; 4.Q-B4, ch, followed by 5.Q~xB, and White has won a pawn. * In position No. 152 White played 1.Q-R3 so that, if Black guarded the Knight by the plausible move 1.... K — Kt2?, THE MIDDLE GAME 121 it would still be won—by 2.Q x Kt, ch!, K xQ; 3. Kt — B7, ch, followed by 4. Kt x Q. * No. 153 is the same combination in another form: Black, by playing Kt — K6, had attacked White’s Queen which stood at Ql. She had been played to Q2 instead of to the No 153 G Gpe Ya 4 WA Uy, AS. better place Bl, and now Black won the Exchange by the elegant Queen sacrifice: 1...QxP,ch!, 2.K xQ, Kt xR, ch, followed by Kt x Q. * In position No. 154 Black first sacrifices a Bishop by 1... Bx P, ch, 2 K x B, and then the exchange by 2... R x Kt, 3. R x R, making a total sacri- fice of a Rook. He wins 1t back, No 154 however, by 3 . Q-K4, ch, followed by QxR, and has thus won the King’s Rook’s pawn * In position No. 155 1. P- KKt3? would be a terrible mis- take, for Black would sacrifice his Queen by 1...Qx Kt, and after 2.Q x Q would capture the opposing Queen by the double 122 attack 2.... Kt better for, if 1.... No. 155 Kets ai ik — U/ eo ay as THE MIDDLE GAME — B6, ch, and so win a Knight. 1. Kt — BS is Q - Kt5? (she should go to Q1), the Queen No. 156 Z ‘Gaa ie S C me BOSE: om a ane 1, ‘ily We is won by 2. Kt-R6, ch, PxKt, 3. Kt-—B6, ch, or by 2. Kt -B6, ch, Px Kt, 3. Kt — R6, ch. No. 156 shows a complicated sacrificial line of play for the purpose of a double attack: The play is 1...R*xP, ch; Kt -—B5, ch, regaining the No. 157 Ae wee m ¥LES aM ic arr ‘hx MW! a 2.K —-Ktl, QxR, ch; 3.KxQ, Queen and deciding the game. After 4. K —Ktl Black, about to capture the Queen, sees just in time that, instead of doing so, he can mate by 4.... R x B, ch!; 5.K-Bl (naturally, if the Queen interposes she is cap- tured), R —-R8,mate. Whenone sees a strong, evena decisive move, one must always ask oneself sf there 1s not a still stronger one. In position No. 157 Black thinks he can win a pawn by 1.... Bx B; 2. Kt x B, Kt x P?, but, instead, he loses the Knight as a result of the very frequently occurring combination 3.Q x Kt, QxQ; 4. KtxP, ch, followed by 5. Kt xQ. THE MIDDLE GAME 123 In position No. 158, by doubling Rooks on his seventh rank, Black has forced the ugly move R-—KKtl which, however, has the advantage of seducing his opponent, now certain of No. 158 No. 159 Mbizee & aie Cimt te Whe WO Ypnyy 7 4 C7 ey a Mae y Mee Wd Z ‘y 7 te th; , “WH, ZY i@ & O12 Y Y Hy Uj meal, Y Uy Gg my WL LY de \ a i, g 7. A vA LAWS, 8 Meo 3 Gl» s victory, into attacking the Rook by 1.... B-Q5?, whereupon the Bishop is won by 2. R—Q8, ch, K—Kt2, 3. Kt —K6, ch. Always take into account every possible check! * In position No. 159, after 1. Kt—Q5, Q-B3? (Q-Q3 or QI] is better) the Queen is won by 2. B—Kt5!, Q xB; 3. KtxP,ch, followed by 4. Kt x Q. *% In position No. 160 White 3 Jj plays 1. P — R6!, offering a pawn y Ui yy in order, after 1....PxP, to |} Pps le GY win a piece by 2. Q —Q5, ch, a We, Z AAG BxKe 9.807 8 8B advance of the King’s Bishop’s | yx 47 yi yz: w= 4 ‘ pawn is often dangerous be- {7% V4 WZ lel 2 cause it may allowa check which, although sometimes harmless, may yet sometimes be fatal. * followed by 3.BxKt. The In position No. 161 the advance of the King’s Bishop’s pawn again proves fatal, although not on account of a check. After 124 THE MIDDLE GAME 1.... P-B4?; 2.PxP, e.p., Rx P (the Queen cannot take as she has to guard the Knight), the way is clear for a sacrifice with a subsequent double attack: 3. Bx P!, PxB; 4. Kt x QP, Q-KB2; 5.KtxR,ch, QxKt; 6.QxKt and White has gained the decisive advantage of Rook, Knight and two pawns for Bishop and Knight. rn No. 162 is a frequently occurring position. Black has played R-Ktl, attacking the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. If White guards it by 1. QR-Ktl?, then Black sacrifices the Rook for the pawn, and, after 2.R xR, plays 2....B x Kt, No. 161 No. 162 EY JY @eY MOUNT ti Ky 4 Ya jm fj Wo We Mt Hie Uy’ may g $7278 Zt brie © Se amt & Y, Py Yi/ “i, ite i Yee, Ye, ae Zi “iy toa ® “A, Je wis Ww wil lw A Oo we RRM RAT WY YS \ per = I SS SS SS Ss Bt N SS iN N NAY SS Ss N WS 0 Ip me , es Wipf RRR Gah BM OR yy, VEgee _ ie ® winning first the Knight, and then, by the double attack on Queen and Rook, the Queen’s Rook. Thus by his “sacrifice”’ he has won a Knight and a pawn. Instead of the faulty move of the Rook, White has two satisfactory moves at his disposal. He can either play 1. B-Kt3 and protect the pawn against the attack of the Rook, or, as in the actual game, he can attack the Bishop by 1.QR-QI! Inreplyto 1....B-K4, 2,.BxB would not be good, for it would bring Black’s Knight into the attack, and for this White would be deservedly punished, after 2... Kt xB; 3. B-—Kt3, by the sacrifice 3....BxP; 4.PxB, followed by the subsequent double attack, Kt — B6, ch, win- ning the Queen—a very frequently occurring combination. Therefore White played 2. B-—Kt3 to guard the pawn, and accepted the possibility of the isolation of his King’s pawn by 2....B xB; 3. P x B in the hope of being compensated for it by the opening of the King’s Bishop’s file for the Rook. is THE MIDDLE GAME 125 In position No. 163 White played 1. P —-Kt4, intending to open lines of attack by P~KKt5. If Black takes the pawn, then after the exchange 2.BxKt, BxB there follows the double attack 3. B - B5 and White wins at least the Exchange. No. 163 Yk & Y yey 2 Vey; V4 0 ¢ 7 Y7 Gi Ae SB Yj ZEA ? Y 4 Ae Wil WS y Y Yeahs YyYy, In position No. 164 Black by 1....R xP! offers a Rook, in order, after 2. Px R?, to win it back by 2....BxP,ch and 3..... Bx R, and so gain two pawns by the transaction. ¥% In position No. 165 the play is 1....B-—B3; 2. KtxB, K x Kt (to guard the Queen’s pawn) and now White offers the Knight at KB6. It cannot be taken because of the double attack BxP,ch, winning the tity Queen. Therefore the King’s A Knight’s pawn also falls and Black’s whole position is broken up. Uy P22 ‘Wy, WY ty, * No. 166 is again a pretty ex- ample of a sacrifice with a subsequent double attack. By 1. P— B8(Q), ch! White sac- rifices an important pawn in order, after 1.... B x Q, to threaten mate at QKt8 by 2. Q -B7. This also attacks the Bishop which, therefore, is lost. 126 THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 167 the play was 1....RxP,ch; 2.K xR, RxP,ch, 3. R-B2 (not K —-Ktl because of Q—R7, mate), No. 166 "FY GRY Tes Ma ed ’ a No. 167 es ae YW ih, x Oo a OG GAS B BiB by FE “a Uy waye®e® ~~ . Q - B6, ch’! (double attack on the King and the Rook at Ql), 4.K —Ktl, RxR, 5.QxR, QxR, ch, and Black won. (Naturally, at the next move, he had to guard against the threatened mate at his KB1, e.g. by K — Kt2). In position No. 168 Black sacrificed his Knight at his K6 in order, after 2.BxkKt, to play 2...Q»P, threatening Q — K7, mate and also attacking the Rook. White could guard against all this if he could castle Since, however, this 1s pre- No 169 V+ Ui ihe ’ ae 4 (8 ty 7 No. 168 Ye YAY, mV! UY Ts la Gs, YY y z 4 ae a? awe 4 : a tr, Uf R a a aw ZY gy YU BR, Ui YOR a Y oy vented by the Bishop at Black’s QR3, the Rook is lost and Black has won the Exchange. THE MIDDLE GAME 127 In position No. 169 White’s last move, Kt (K5) — B4, was faulty. Black then offered his King’s Bishop at KR7 (1.... B x P, ch) in order, after 2. K x B, to win back his piece by the double attack 2....Q-—B2,ch. In this very frequently occurring combination, one must not overlook (as very often happens) that the attacked Knight can save itself by playing to K5. Here, however, this attempt is ineffective, for Black captures the Knight, and after PxQ wins White’s Queen. White, therefore, has lost the King’s Rook’s pawn ¥ In position No. 170 White by 1. P —K6 discovered an attack by his Queen’s Bishop on the hostile Queen. She played to No 171 or, Uy / z z £ WY Ye FG yp Yj? yy Kt2, and then White by 2 P-K7 offered the pawn in order, after 2... Bx P? (B—Kt2 was better), 3. Kt x B, ch, Q x Kt, to win a piece by the double attack B — Q6. *% In position No. 171, by playing 1.Q-—B2 White guarded the pawn attacked by Black’s Queen Black exploited this faulty move (Q — Q2 should have been played) by 1. . B-B4! If White captures the proffered Bishop, there follows 2 ...Q x P, and by the double attack on Rook and Knight Black wins back the piece. If White, instead of capturing the Bishop, moves the Queen to Q2 or B1, then Black has won a tempo. A not infrequent combination. 128 THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 172 the double attack must be prepared by a double sacrifice. 1....P—K6!; 2. BP x P (the Rook cannot take without leaving the other Rook en prise, and a Knight move, with the exception of Kt —- K4 or B3, would be followed by the catastrophe, Q x P,mate), Q x Kt!, 3.Q x Q, Kt - K5 ch, followed by 4....KtxQ, and Black has won a Knight. ¥ In position No. 173 Black by 1.... Q —- Bd! attacks Queen and Knight, while the Rook is also in danger. White cannot take the Queen, since Black first takes the Rook with check, and then, if 3.Q-B1?, forces mate: 3. ..B-—Q5,ch!, 4 K—RIl, RxQ, mate. If 2. Kt-B38or Bl, Black exchanges Queens and then takes the Rook. White has nothing better than Q —K1, whereupon Black takes the Knight. * In position No. 174, after 1... P—Kt5, 2. Kt -K1 (Kt —-K4 is better), there follows a sacrifice at White’s Q4 with a double No. 173 No 174 WU, eh Z Gay ZY No. 172 f “ee v Y 4, ; 4 Gat yg ee a gd & Coan 5 / ee Y Jem Mw 1 Oy Wy 4 A C4 C0 4 g bay Yi UUhb tpt Bm Ufty Sir 2 ‘ ae fa ca 4 AGwe 8 w# U Uisg YY 4 attack on the King and the Queen’s Rook: 2.... Kt x QP!; 3. Px Kt, QxP, ch; 4. K—RI1, Q xR, and Black has won the Exchange and two pawns. THE MIDDLE GAME 129 In position No. 175 a double attack along the King’s file against Black’s Queen and Rook is possible, since the Queen has to guard the mate threatened at Black’s KKt2. The play, therefore, was: 1. Kt x P!, Px Kt; 2. QR —K1 (the other Rook will find employment along the King’s Bishop’s file). If 2....Q —KB2, there follows 3. B x P, ch (not R x R, ch, because of KxR!), 3....K—-Ktl (if QxB, then R or QxR, mate), 4.R xR, ch, and Black must give up his Queen. If 2....B —K3, then the Rook takes the Bishop, the Queen being unable to retake because of the mate at Black’s KKt2. The actual play No 175 No 176 tf, & V4, Re [ Z YY, B74, J Mw, lila, , 7 y; Ly x 4s tps 1 Y fy, Yi YY M&S 7a / tf, % 4 was 2... Kt—K4;,; 3.PxKt, P—Q4, 4.P—K6 and White had won a pawn and had a very strong attack. * In conclusion, No. 176 is an example from an end-game of a sacrifice followed by a double attack. rhe play was 1.RxP, ch!, RxR; 2. P—Kt5, ch, K —- Kt3; 3 PxR,K xP. Admittedly, White has won nothing, but he 1as secured the exchange of Rooks and displaced the hostile <ing, so that victory is now quite easy. * *% UNGUARDED MEN Whenever possible, all men should be guarded. The safest uard is by means of pawns. Unguarded men are frequently source of disadvantage. Sometimes they are attacked, while t the same time another threat is developed. Sometimes they He castled, whereupon White THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 177 the unguarded position of the Bishop at Q3 involved Black in difficulties. won a pawn by 2.KtxP, QxB?; 3. Kt x Kt, ch, Px Kt; facilitate an annoying pin or even a double attack. A few examples will make these circumstances clearer. 130 ce a —BieiSi-oHl “a a, Sag an eds aa “a cia No. 178 ate Nee an WS ASS BS No. 177 SW “nea oe \ AS Ws mee er Kt x Kt or BxKt, he can win the B4 and at the same time Queen by 2. Kt — B6 or Q7, ch. prepares a discovered check so that, after 1.... * | ee (Q6) - i =a" OR — BI, lost. No. 179 oe a =. 4.QxB. Black could certainly have avoided this by In position No. 178 the Knight at Black’s QR4 is unguarded. 2... KtxKt!; 3.QxKt, BxP,ch; 4.KxB, QxB but the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn would then have been isolated and, White attacks it by 1. Kt after 5. KR m mM ' O_> m meee ses we 9 S YP eg is a 2 oa BE o asgos” 58 O .b O94 & = I~ 6» Ow De © G&G -o8 887.3 CXF ome oE . o> 38 g Fw SX SERPER Eom ZPBSOQSvn ase O,,2 fy o) oan ps BE x yw ~~ Oo. AM sos ge” Sa Sse bie wg. SeSim san a Wyss \\ kt x VX WW N \ AN ~~ Na “\ os WY «1 «18 Cu a pawn by l.... ord THE MIDDLE GAME 131 made a psychological mistake, he has neglected to consider what could happen when he has made his move. ov In position No. 180 Black took advantage of the unguarded position of the Rook at White’s KR in the following way: 1.... Q-B4, ch; 2. K -K2 (or 2.Q-K4?,QxQ, ch; 3. K xQ, No. 180 | No. 181 Zz ¥ yy KEE YAO YA, Yay Ma YA ww eA Yep AS /, A, y 7 yy 18 8 ee KtxP,ch, followed by KtxR), Kt xKtP, ch!; 3. Qx Kt, Q-K5, ch; 4. Q-K3, Q x R, winning the exchange. The con- tinuation was: 5.P —-K6, R —-Kt7; 6.P -K7,R xR,ch;7.K xR (if QxR, then Q-K5,ch wins the unguarded Bishop), R — Kt7,ch; 8. K — Q3, Q —- Kt8, mate. A pretty mating position. * alte ig WU, In position No. 181 Black dare not play 1....Bx BP, be- cause after 2. KR — Bl hewould lose one of the two unguarded Bishops. (2.QR-BI1 would be inferior because Black could play 2.... B — Q6, attacking the other Rook, so that White, by 3.R xB, BxR; 4.K xB, would obtain only the advantage of two minor pieces for Rook and pawn.) * In position No. 182 Black played 1....B—R4, a terrible 132 THE MIDDLE GAME oversight. But how to exploit this mistake must first of all be discovered. White by 2. Q —R4! wins one of the two un- guarded pieces—the Rook at Black’s K1 (and with mate) or the Bishop at Black’s QR4. In position No. 183 the unguarded pieces lead not to a direct loss of material but to a disadvantage in position. The play was: 1....P-QB3; 2. R-—K2? (now the Bishop at White’s QR4 and the Rook at his K2 are unguarded), Q — Kt3; No. 183 No. 184 —F. wikes 1 aval 43 ys Vg Go Y 4 * Z G tls ¢ 0, Yt ty ti, Wh W We, CR Ws, tha aD Pa Qite th, MN a, TAB 44 9 Ga bo Wa Ua, BR y Yy tv @ A Wa B Te We we Whe UY HuolGeae (EB Do 3. B-K3, Q-R83, forcing White to play the ugly move 4. B—QlI which hinders his development. In position No. 184 the unguarded position of the Knight leads to a pinning attack which forces an end-game unfavour- able to Black. The play was: 1.P—K5, BPxP (if P-Q4, then White would continue the attack by P-—B4), 2.BxP, R-K2, 3.BxKt, RxB; 4.PxP, RxR,ch; 5.KxR, R-—-B2,ch (otherwise he will not recover his lost pawn), 6. K —-Kt2,P xP, 7. R-—Q8, ch, R-B1; 9. R xR, ch, K xR. The pawn ending is favourable to White. The “Majority of Pawns on the Queen’s Side” must result in a passed pawn there, which will draw off Black’s King while White’s captures the pawns in the centre and on the King’s side. There followed: 9.K-B3, K-K2; 10.K-K4, K-Q3; 11.P—-QkKté4 (if THE MIDDLE GAME 133 11. P— B4, then Black, by 11....P-—B4; 12. P-R3, P-QR4 prevents the establishment of a passed pawn by White and after 13. K-—B5, P—Kt3, ch; 14. K —K4, K —K3 obtains a drawn position), P-QR3; 12. P—QR4, P-Kt3; 13. P - B4, P-—QR4 (if 13....P-—B3 or P—B4, then White obtains a passed pawn by 14. P-Kt5; if 13.... K —-K3, by 14. P— Kt, P-—QR4; 15.P-B5 and 16. P—Kt6; and, finally, if 13.... P —R3, by 14. P - B5, ch, K —-K3; 15. P — Kt5, etc.); 14. P x P, K — B4; 15. K x P and Black loses his King’s side pawns. THE DESTRUCTION OF A GUARD The protection of one man by another can frequently be interrupted or destroyed by a more or less forcible drawing off No. 185 ‘ ? te = ag Yi tt ty My G04 Yip YZ YY LM 6g Ma, ith, Wh ” Yi), pees Chee ha 4 ty yy the Wt YY Yy Yi y, y Wile, Yi 4 Wi); Ct! yyw y Wie Yh, C&- VY, 4% WZ wl" y “pL, yy “ftiale LG WHE We BO‘x 7: yyy (a “* GL: BL of the protecting man. This is shown in positions Nos. 185 and 186. In No. 185 the play was: 1. R-R8, ch!, K xR; 2. Q x Q and White has won the Queen for a Rook. There had been a previous move in the combination. The position was in essentials No. 186. The play was 1.BxP, ch, Q xB, and then followed the Rook sacrifice. (If Black does not take the Bishop, but plays 1.... K —- B1, then mate is forced by 2. B—B5, ch, Q or R — K2; 3. R-R8, ch, BxR; 4. Q—Kt8, mate. ¥* 134 THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 187 Black obtains the advantage by lL... RxB; 2.PxR; Rx Kt. ¥ In position No. 188 White wins a pawn by 1.Q~xP, ch No. 187 No. 188 Yj Ne Wh OA eva ff & wae aa ty YY j Y Wha, Y Je Ui, oO Yy (>) ttt, 4 87 | | is Ws, De UU A ® Y ‘7. LM, a i, 7 7 oF N VL ge y Z Uy ey Y, (more forceful than 1. Bx P, ch), QxQ; 2.BxQ, ch, K xB; 3. Rx Kt. Y ie * In position No. 189 Black wins the Queen by 1.... Rx P, ch; No. 189 No. 190 WEST Bees Hs fea Me Re S Ui: gs, “Y BK WSS WN \ \ iN \ % ‘c Y 7 SS “ ve 7 fo lo WY tif, Uy Bae Z ins “Ss + \ pe \e bor N WN CA NN \ Uy Yel, Uy tly J Y oe” aol A J Wy Ay Ye e - a 0 we A) | ee Re / 20 7 # 2@ 2.K —Bl (if White makes any other move, then the Queen is captured straight away), R - Kt8, ch!; 3. K xR, QxQ. S SSO W \ Vp, THE MIDDLE GAME 135 In position No. 190 Black wins a pawn by l.... Kt x RP; 2.PxKt, Rx Kt. * In position No. 191 Black wins the Queen by 1.... Q — K4, ch; No. 191 No. 192 YW Ow O| leo Yey, FY Miu e e ur ‘ ~ \ SS Yop Y SN \ deh ae: \ W \ SS WN WS te Rr ty tity Ws ty g Be Mel 54 Z WSK Yy Of af Wy ty" A g Q -Kt3, R-R8,ch!; 3. K-Kt2 (if KxR, then QxQ), —Kt8, ch!; 4. K xR, Q x Q, ch. ¥ UA NS . SY re R In position No. 192 Black wins the Exchange by 1....Q- K8, ch; 2.R-—-Bl, BxP, chi; 3.K xB, QxR. A very fre- quently occurring combina- tion. * In position No. 193 White would make a bad mistake by playing 1.BxP. Black would offer the sacrifice of the ex- change at his KB4, in order to remove the guard on White’s Rook at K1, which would then be won by Kt-B6, ch, viz. 1.BxP? RxB!; 2.R xR, Kt — B6, ch!; 3. R x Kt! (3.P x Kt? leads to mate—3....QxR,ch; 4. K-Kt2, R-XK7, ch: 5. K -R3, RxP,ch; 6. K—Kt4, Q-R5, mate), QR, ch; 4.R -B1, B xP, ch! (again a forcible drawing off of the guard- * In position No. 194 Black obtains the advantage by l.... THE MIDDLE GAME R x Kt!; 2. R xR, Q xB, ch. ing man); 5. K xB, QxR, and Black has won the Exchange while still maintaining an attack. Position No. 195 is an infrequent, but typical and very pretty 136 Co n Ss SS S55. : ps xs S R a Ok Set 2 S ~ Soe 4 Re Sei eds a RSS " ‘~—in* N RS SY \ ie [2 lagemagam =] oN . ee = [i ORE ‘|a Ba orice ea SN ay “a : rs s ‘ a sey . aR ~ NK VES 6 $ WN wc Mah ec NSS SN Cay = Soy 3 WN \ WS SS RAY ; a = = AN st 1 x SI BS wo & A fn a | WSS SQ WY WS = WSs SS WS WARY WSS ee eee | bee Oe a SS . Sy Nie pon SQ QS Si YAN bt i co A (da SS SS SS N S N RRS \S w Ws [esos oll ss cet El & ASS SWS Fee] SS. cS SSN EN Wr WH “Tea pe ee El a eolll 3 v & . ; a Eas a \ 2 a) ee | ge 2 si cS oe MEAS EE ag .__. WN N eS SN... = 3 2 = nacre \N Nes NS Wy : W Seenys K —-R2 a Rook (by 2.QxQ, RxQ; the Queen, or, if 1.... 3. R xR). THE MIDDLE GAME 137 The guard on a man can sometimes be destroyed by inter- rupting the line of action of the guard. This is shown in posi- tions Nos. 196 and 197. In No. 196 after 1....P -Q4? Black loses a piece by 2. P — K5, Kt -Kt5, 3. P-K6!, PxP; 4.Qx Kt. In No. 197 White thought to win a pawn by 1.QxP?. But Black immediately showed the move to be bad. He shut off the Rook’s guard on the Queen by playing 1.... Kt —Q5, ch, and, to avoid losing the Queen, White was forced to sacrifice the Exchange at his Q4. I~Lusory PROTECTION If a man which has a particularly important function to perform is attacked, then it must be guarded, not by any man, but only by one that can re- place it in the performance of that function. If the guard- ing man cannot thus replace it, then the protection is only illusory and the man attacked can be captured in spite of it. Position No. 198 will make these circumstances clear. White’s Queen’s Knight’s pawn has the function of guarding his QB3 against Black’s Knight which, if the pawn were absent, would play to that square (Kt ~ B6, ch) and attack both King and Queen. If Black attacks the pawn by 1....R-Ktl, then 2. R-Ktl or 2. Kt-B4 would provide only illusory protection. After either move Black could capture the pawn, since after the recapture he would win the Queen by Kt -B6, ch. White must, therefore, guard the pawn, not by 2. R-Ktl or 2. Kt — B4, but by either 2.B-Q4 or 2.K-BIl. If Black then sacrifices the Rook for the pawn, the latter’s function is assumed by the man recapturing. Therefore, when guarding a man, always ask yourself the No.198 138 THE MIDDLE GAME question whether it cannot still be captured in spite of the pro- tection. * Position No. 199 shows another example of an illusory pro- tection. Black attacks the Queen’s Knight’s pawn by l.... R-Ktl. White guards it by 2. QR-Ktl?, whereupon Black’s Rook none theless capturesit, for after 2... RxP!; 3.RxR, Black, by 3....Bx Kt, wins first the Knight and then, as the Bishop attacks both Rooks, the Ex- change, so that on the whole transaction he has gained a pawn (cf. No. 162). ¥% No. 199 A similar case of illusory pro- tection is very frequently seen when a man has to fulfil two separate functions, e.g. to guard two men, or especially when it is engaged in different direc- tions. Some examples of this now follow. In position No. 200 Black’s Queen’s pawn has to guard both Knights. That is beyond its power. White captures first one No. 200 No. 201 H7 QU ey iiteeaad -" as - 2 ws ly a Y/ hast wy Ys Knight and then the other, thus obtaining the advantage of two minor pieces for a Rook. - a a TAY mR es NS A THE MIDDLE GAME 139 In position No. 201 Black plays 1....P-Q4? (B-K2 is better) and after 2. KtxB, Px Kt, 3.PxP, P xP loses at least a pawn, since neither his Queen nor his Knight can guard at the same time the pawn at his Q4 and the Rook at his K1. White can win the pawn quite simply by 4.RxR,ch and 5. Kt x P. More subtle and stronger, however, is the trans- position 4. KtxP!, for after 4.... Ktx Kt White takes the Knight with his Queen and then, if she is captured, plays R xR, mate. The interpolation of R xR by Black does not alter things at all, for it is answered quite simply by R x R. Many cases of pinning belong to the section on Illusory Protection, as, for example, No. 202. No 202 No 203 4B Y /, Ben 4, Rew 8, Ww Ee eH 7, 3 Oak, *k ty; “YY CL 4 ¢/G , y, ab, VOM 24,4 & 4 tts, A Bia RRS Wa, bag, Fly, 4 MUipty / Z / 4 a pli, Bi, ae, WRYRY, Ye, VIRYMY, yt low tip Y Ye / afl 4s R27 Se RR Ww RAR mM Ye YRC yw » RE @ After 1.Q-—Kt3 White’s Knight’s pawn is unpinned and so attacks the Knight. If the latter goes to Kt5, then the Queen simply captures it for after P x Q Black’s Queen 1s en prise. No. 203 is an example of a very frequently occurring possi- bility. You must make yourself thoroughly acquainted with it so that, uf the opportunity should occur, you may be ready for it some moves in advance. 1. R x P!, Kt x R?, 2.Q xP, ch, K -Ktl; 3.QxP, mate. * IT have included many similar cases in the section on Pinning. 140 THE MIDDLE GAME I give here the most frequently occurring, in the hope that it may serve as a warning. In position No. 204 White carelessly plays 1. P -KR3?, where- upon Black’s Queen captures the Bishop, which the King’s Bishop’s pawn, pinned by Nor a0e Black’s Bishop, does not guard. ‘ii qo ‘z\| As already remarked, a very a e Aa frequently occurring mistake! b Ce hy, yy S * % DISCOVERED ATTACKS If the line of attack of a piece is obstructed by a man of the same colour and is then opened ty by the moving away of that pe El & obstruction, coe a ‘“dis- covered’”’ attack, which may, of course, be a ‘“‘discovered”’ check. This kind of attack is extra- ordinarily dangerous because the man moving may itself attack or capture something else. If, in discovering check, the man moving itself also gives check, then we have a “double” check. This we have already discussed in the ‘Elements’. No. 205 is the simple type. 1. R xP, ch, K-Rl. Now the line of attack of the Bishop will be ere opened by a move of the Rook. eee If the Rook goes to Kté4, for example, then Black’s Kingisin = | Big Ug / check from the Bishop. How- Gy Pe Udy ® 5 a ever, Black can answer this yy thay vy, os Y a tn Uf Ip check by P-B3, and White Up Yy Vn 08, Ms has gained nothing very great. YY Yi The Rook could with much e Vi, Ya, more pie capture i reas ZZ VB pawn and so win the Queen, ‘RL Gy 4 since Black has first and fore- yy ee yo most to parry the attack onhis YG WMG aR King. Strongest of all, how- ever, is the Rook sacrifice at Kt8 with double check. The King must take and White plays Q —- Kt4, mate. ag ZZ THE MIDDLE GAME 141 Some examples of more complicated developments now follow. It is obvious that in position No. 206 White can sacrifice the Exchange by R x B in order to regain it afterwards by B x P, ch. But, instead of the direct attack, B x P, ch, a concealed attack, a preparation for a discovered attack, is much stronger and more subtle. Thus the play is 1.RxB, QRxR, 2.R~xP! This preparatory move 1s all the stronger since simultaneously the Queen is attacked. She is won in any case—if Q — B2, by any move of the Rook; if Q —- B4, by R — K5, ch or R - B6, ch; No 206 No 207 W824, HweZ7, : Vy, dh < we a4 @, a2 iy if fi, ftp , & Vi WALL | Ww W he “4 Ol 1 / “6 i RAB EGA AE: , G “fy E ae ao, B : You yw S yl, v4 B YB a Yl? wy g y - Yj 4 g VY, y / om, a if Q —-R4, by Rx Kt, ch or R-K5, ch. If2... R -B3, White can win the Queen by 3 RxR, ch? Much stronger, however, is 3. R—-K8, giving double check and mate. In position No. 207 White played 1. QR - K1, threatening to endanger the Queen by 2. R-K6, Q-R4, 3 B-QI1 (not R-KRI because of Q-Kt5), Q-—R2, 4.R-KRI, and at least to win the Kmght (after Kt-—R3). Black played 1... KR—-K1, but after 2. R-—K6, RxR, 3.PxR he was forced to give up the Knight by 3.... K — B1, in order to escape the dangers of the discovered check, wz. 3.... Kt—Rl, 4. P—~K7, ch, with an attack on the Rook, or 3... R — Q7, ch; 4.R-B2, RxR,ch, 5.K xR, Kt—Rl, 6. P-—K7, ch, fol- lowed, if 6.... Kt -B2, by 7. P —K8 (Q), ch, or, if 6.... K — R2, by 7. Q-R4, R3, or R2, ch and White wins. 142 THE MIDDLE GAME Not only to the King but also to the Queen and other pieces are discovered attacks dangerous. In position No. 208 the play was: 1.R —-Q6, Q-B2?. Here the Queen is unguarded, and indirectly threatened by the No. 208 No. 209 aude Je y S44, Ye UWiwTG Wa, “| |e @ & Y Yn GAG GM y Z 4 ys 4, 1, 44 Jeg Mb / opposing Queen. White wins by 2. B — Q5!, for, if 2.... B then Black’s Queen is lost by 3. Rx B,ch, PxR, 4. Qx Very often a sacrifice culminates in a discovered check. In position No. 209 White played 1. Q —B4 in order, if Black were tempted to play for a mate by 1....Q-—KR4?, to force a mate himself by 2.BxKt,ch, RxB; 3.Q-B8, ch, ; etc. Black, however, played nies 1... R x B! and, after 2.Q xR, YW ay =a ZG by 2.... | yy Gm MeZ sacrificed his Queen by ty Y ta & Vah Q «R, ch!, and after 3. K x Q, V7 2 Wi z ZY Z regained the Queen with ad- iy ag L J Y vantage by 3.... Kt— B4, ch. © OAs a y PF: i, US Wi Position No. 210 is a very Z GY y BW frequently occurring case. thy & thie Y Z % Black thoughtlessly played j tae oe “yan 1... Q- R4, bringing his Queen Y Y ’ al V/ El T/ into the line of attack of the hostile Queen, which line White suddenly opened by 2. KtxQP!. If Black takes the Queen -—he cannot take the Knight without losing his own Queen THE MIDDLE GAME 143 —then White first exchanges his endangered Knight by Kt x Kt(K7), ch, and then, after B x Kt, regains the Queen by R x Q, and so has won the most important pawn. In the actual game Black declined the exchange of Queens and played 2.... Q —Kt4, whereupon after 3. P- QR4, Q —K1 (if Q x KtP, then KR — Ktl wins the Queen); 4. Kt x Kt(B6), ch, Px Kt; No 211 “Atif 4G aay Wy Wi No 212 eZ YY WN SS ee dor “ \\ \ SSS AWA W \ WN \ WY “v \N WS N \ per WS WS XS o\ \ \ AY \ X a MWY} X do WN NSS ‘\“ » WY XY 5. KtxQBP, Black had lost a second pawn. A vis-d-vis of Queen and Queen on a rank, file, or diagonal is thus always very dangerous. For example, in the typical cases Nos. 211 and 212. In position No. 211 1. Q x QP would be a great mistake since the Queen would be lost after 1....B xP, ch. The correct play is to drive back Black’s Rook at B2 by 1. Kt — Kt5, and then to capture the Queen’s pawn with check. * In position No. 212 White wins the Queen by 1. Kt xB, PxKt?; 2. B —Kt6, ch, P x B; 3.QxQ. In position No. 213 also the No. 213 0 OZGRBY, x iy ALS Who Yo, BU BE Y &YZ YG, . Ys Yt, ae WW, WM, Uf Bi; Will 1 off Yiby, BBS Yj, WES White Queen ventures into a vts-d-vis with the Black, and is lost. 144 THE MIDDLE GAME The play was 1. Q—Kt4?, KtxP; 2.QxP?, Kt — B6, ch, and Black won the Queen. * Position No. 214 again illustrates the danger of the vis-a-vis of Queens: Black played 1....R—B2, whereupon White, by 2. Q-R3, threatening Kt-—R6,ch, indirectly attacked the Queen. Black now thought it a sufficient precaution to avoid the check from the Knight by playmg 2...K-—Rl?. (He should have retired the Queen to B1.) But White now attacked Queen and Rook by 3. Kt-—R6!. If the Rook guards the Queen by No 214 No 215 giigMaee 2 (|Ezd ae @t’ & & nl ele af te, te GUN: ee a BY LG we Bama BLA, wy, BA B 1g Wie Od GORGE te |e m0) be SEG ® RR A BBA UY yen @ 2 OGYwyvA®e R —- K2, White exchanges Queens and then wins the Exchange by Kt - B7, ch. Black actually played 3... Q x Q, whereupon White, all the same, won the Exchange by 4. Kt xR, ch, and then recaptured the Queen. * In position No. 215 White thoughtlessly plays 1. Q-—K2, whereupon, after 1....P-—Q6 (opening the line of attack of Black’s Queen) he is at once at a decided disadvantage. Queen and Bishop are attacked, and after 2. Bx Q, P x Q White has two pieces en prise, and one of them is lost. Tut IMPRISONMENT OF A BISHOP No piece can be so easily shut in—and, indeed, won—by pawns as a Bishop. The typical and frequently occurring position is No. 216. THE MIDDLE GAME 145 White’s Bishop has captured the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. Black closes its line of retreat by P—-QKt3 and wins it by R-RI. * In position No. 217 Black played 1.... Kt -KKt5 and after 2.BxKt, Bx B; 3. P—B4 neglected to retire the Bishop at No 216 No 217 once to Q2. He played 3.... P—QR3?, and now White closed the line of retreat of the Bishop by 4. P — B5!, and so threatened to win it by 5. P—-KR3, B —- R4, 6. P —-KKté4, a threat difficult to parry without incurring some other disadvantage. % In position No. 218 Black cannot move the attacked Rook, as White would win by Q xP, ch, and Q-Kt7, mate. So Black plays 1. ..P —Q4 and now White would make a big mistake if he captured the Rook. Black would recapture with Queen or Bishop, and would threaten to shut in White’s Bishop for ever by P —- QB4 and P — QB5, a threat not easy to parry. Admittedly, the Bishop is not lost, for White, by playing P - QR3, can open for it a retreat at QR2, but it takes nofurther partinthe game, it is completelyshutin. P — B4, L 146 THE MIDDLE GAME in reply to Black’s P —- QB4, is out of the question, for then QP xP wins the Bishop. Here we see a grave disadvantage of doubled pawns. If the pawn were at QKtz2, instead of at QB3, then the simple move P — QB3 would open for the Bishop a retreat to QB2. [The possibility of this imprisonment of the Bishop frequently occurs in the opening known as the Ruy Lopez (1. P—~K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3, 3. B — Kt5) Upon it depends the strength of the defence by 3.... P- QR3.] In reply to 1.... P—Q4, therefore, White must first capture the pawn with his King’s pawn (2.PxP,e.p.) and then sane after 2....QxP and the ex- change of Queens he can at “yf y - , SUG l . th MZ8 ie MOS Bihange O BxQP would og z Uae V4 z wee be bad because of 3. Q—-Q4, 7 gp 5 Jy AT 5 ye threatening Q-Kt7, mate—a Yi; % y th, oy wy threat difficult to parry). 4p, WY, “Un Jy In position No. 219 Black & ee, WY, O46 BY played 1....P-—R4. Now it tii” eee, “GH, would have been a big mistake rm —4 ‘Sp Wh to retreat the attacked Bishop to QR3 for 1t would have been shut in and captured by 2....P-QKtd, 3. B-Q3, P-Kt5. We see that a Bishop can never be shut in except as the result of a very bad move. THE CAPTURE OF THE QUEEN AFTER HER PENETRATION TO QKT7 (Q x QKTP) When the Queen has penetrated into the enemy camp, it may easily happen that she is attacked on all sides and lost. I have previously given one such example (No. 128) and I now in- stance two typical cases arising after the capture of the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. In position No. 220 White plays 1.QR-QI, setting a trap which, after 1. KR —Q1, would be too obvious, for then, after 1....QxKtP, the Queen would be immediately won by 2.KR—Ktl. As itis, after 1. QR-QI1, Black thinks he can safely take the pawn. He learns better after 1....Q x KtP?; THE MIDDLE GAME 147 2,.R-Ktl, QxRP; 3.R-RI, Q-Ktd; 4.KR-Ktl. The Queen is lost. Similarly, in position No. 221: Here the play was 1. Q-—Kt3, R-—Bl; 2. P x P? (White thinks this move is strong, since the hostile Queen’s Bishop has to No. 220 No. 221 ie wee Ate mo a ms : 3 at J We, , a Y iM : * Ls Y a Peel GQ uimin 8 @ wie hes CSES WY \ S& WOE Og Re NCAY \S Dobe LS WN x “My, nye "pe & WE: Ex Wi Mp | Y U7 Vib, og oe Are Ys “fy UZ Cy, NG : RE Ber Ky NY 77 MWA, 178 guard the Queen’s Knight’s pawn), B x BP!; 3. Q x P? (attack- ing Rook and Knight!), Bx B; 4.Q xR, ch, K —B2!, and the Queen is lost. If, instead, 4.Q x Kt, then 4....B—K5 wins the Knight. Therefore, when there are many pieces on the board, always make sure of a safe retreat before venturing far into the enemy camp with your Queen. be aS NS Stow SS : SAS SNES tas WN Ws aE WN | ihe ie KANN YS WH w \ x 2 S NY SSS. ig xk* Tor ForRcIBLE EXPOSURE OF THE KING A very simple and frequently occurring form of mating attack is introduced by the sacrifice of a Bishop for two pawns at KKt6 or KR6. In this way the King is deprived of the pro- tection of his pawns, and very often succumbs to the attack of the Queen, if other pieces are ready to help her. This is shown in positions Nos. 222, 223, and 224. In position No. 222 the play was: 1. Q-B2, P-B4 (P-—Kt3 was better); 2. PxP,e.p., KtxP; 3. Kt -Kt5, P—Kt3 (the threat was 4.BxP,ch, K-Rl; 5. Kt-—Kt6, mate, which naturally would not be prevented by 3....P—KR3); 4. Bx P!, 148 THE MIDDLE GAME PxB, 5.QxP, ch, K -Rl; 6. Q —R6, ch, K —Ktl; 7. Kt —-Kt6 (threatening mate by either Q-—R8 or KtxB), Kt —B2, 8. Kt x B, mate. The attack in position No. 223 is similar. The play was 1.BxP,PxB, 2.QxP, ch, K—BI1!. Now the King is exposed to numerous attacks against which the wall No 222 ACIe® Mer ay a ws m & Re ees th, Y, SN NS Ss th, eR Go R&R GY BRZ No 223 4 4 EY WUYZeY x me SEAS WS po \\N WS Wy of pawns would have guarded him. White wins by 3. R -R7, after which the mate by Queen or Rook at KB7 can be parned only by the sacrifice Q —K2, for, 1f 3.. R-K2, then after 4.Q~xB,ch, K—KI! (if K—Ktl, then Q or R-RS8, mate), 5. R-R8,ch the Queen is lost in even more unfavourable circumstances Even stronger than 3 R-R7 is 3 Kt —Kt5!, If Black guards against 4.Q-B7, mate by 3....Q-—K2,then 4. Kt —-R7, ch wins the Queen. If 3.... R —-K2, then White wins both Bishop and Queen (4. Q x B,ch, K —-KI1!', 5. R-R8,ch). If3. ..B x Kt, then 4. R-—R8, ch, K-K2, 5. R-—R7, ch, K-Bl, 6. Q or R-B7, mate. Finally, if 3...K-—K2, then 4. R-R7, ch, K —Q3, 5 Kt-—B7, ch wins the Queen. The end is still quicker after the apparently better move 2.... B—Kt2 (instead of 2....K —Bl). White again attacks by 3. Kt —Kt5 and, if Black does not sacrifice his Queen for the Knight but guards against 4. Q —-B7, mate by 3....Q-—B3 or K2, then White mates in two moves: 4. R — R8, ch!, K xR, 5. Q —R7, mate. THE MIDDLE GAME 149 In position No. 224 we again have the typical sacrifice of the Bishop, with a subsequent mating attack. 1.BxP!,PxB; 2.QxP. Now Black’s King is quite exposed. The threat is R-B7. The continuation was: 2....Q—Ktl; 3. Q —R5, ch! (not Q-—R6, ch? because after Q-—R2 White’s attack is at an end. In such positions the attacker should, as far as possible, play to do everything with check!), Q — R2; 4.Q-K8,ch, Kt-Bl! (if 4....Q-Ktl?, then 5.QxB, RxKt?; 6.B-—Kt2 and wins); 5. R-B7! (stronger than Q x QB), Q-B7; 6.Q x KB, Q xB, ch; 7. R- Bl (now Black must give up his Queen, for, if she moves, e.g. to Q7, there follows RxKt, mate), RxKt (in order, after 8.RxQ?, Sf No. 224 No. 225 Y, Uy ae avist ke a Ge ote o se WS Ue os an a kn Me GS R xR, ch, to have three pieces for the Queen); 8. Q x Kt, ch, K-—R2; 9.RxQ and White, with his marked superiority in material, wins quite easily. pe A. ae Yo, ne oo 7, 8 WY We S % Similarly, the play in position No. 225 was: 1.... Q —R7, ch; 2. K —-Bl, B x P! (by 2.... Q-—R8, ch; 3. Kt —-Ktl Black would not attain much); 3. P x B,Q x RP, ch; 4. K — Ktl, B — R7, ch; 5. K — RI (if now the Bishop were not at K3 but at Q2, and therefore White’s KB2 were not guarded, there would follow the typical and exceptionally frequent mate 5.... B—Kt6, ch; 6. K —~Ktl, Q-R7,ch; 7.K-Bl, QxP, mate), Kt —B5; 6. Kt x Kt (after 6. B x Kt this typical mate by B — Kt6, ch!, etc. would follow), BxkKt,ch; 7. K-—Ktl, B-—R7, ch; 8. K-Rl, Q-Bé6, ch!; 9. KxB, R-K4 (threatening R — R4, ch, followed by R or Q-R8, mate. If 10. K —Ktl, 150 THE MIDDLE GAME this mate is forced by 10....R—KR4. Therefore White must sacrifice his Queen); 10.Q-—-B5,RxQ; 11.BxR. Black now wins a Bishop by either Q — R4, ch (with Q x B to follow) or by Q x B and has a crushing superiority. *% In position No. 226 the Bishop sacrifice must be supple- mented by a Rook sacrifice in order to complete the breach. The play was: 1.KtxBP, KtxKt; 2.BxKt, P—KKt3; 3.BxP!, RxR, ch (if P x B, then Q x Kt); 4.R xR, Kt xB; 5. R - B7!, B — B4, ch; 6. K—R1, K xR; 7.QxP,ch, K-K1! No. 226 No. 227 7, Uf” Uf" / UW Wh BR DBR a GLYN &® (if 7.... K —-B3, then 8. B—B3, ch, followed, if 8.... K - B4, by 9. Q —R5, ch, K —-K5; 10. Q — B3, mate, or, if 8.... Kt — K4, by 9. Q-—Kt7, ch, K-B4, 10.Q-Kt5, ch, K-K5, 11. Q~x Kt, mate); 8.QxKt, ch, K-K2, 9.B-Kt5,ch, K-Q3, 10. B —- B4, ch, K —K2 (if 10....K xP, then 11. Q—-B85, ch, K —B5, 12. Q xB, mate), 11. P- Q6, ch', Bx P; 12. B-Kt5, mate. In position No. 227 the decisive breach is made, not by a Bishop sacrifice, but in an exceptionally brilliant way by two Rook sacrifices. The play was: 1.P-QKt4, KtxP?; 2.Q-Q4, Kt-B3; 3.RxP,ch!, KxR (if 3....K-Bl, then 4. R-3B7, ch, K-Ktl; 5. R-Kt3,ch, K-Rl; 6.RxP,ch, KtxR; 7. Kt-—B7, mate); 4.RxP,ch!!, KtxR; 5. Q-—Kt6, ch, THE MIDDLE GAME 151 K —Rl or Bl; 6. Kt-—B7, mate or 6. Q—-—B7, mate, respect- ively. Tort ATTACK WITH THE KiNQ’s BisHop’s PAWN At KB4 the King’s Bishop’s pawn has but little effectiveness; on the contrary, if it stands by itself, it makes a somewhat unesthetic impression, and is rather a source of loosening and weakness than of attack. The case, however, is vastly different if the King’s pawn stands beside it. These two pawns together are very strong. They command many central squares and are constantly threatening to advance to an attack which con- cerns as much the centre as the King (after Castles (KR)). The advance of the King’s Bishop’s pawn to KB5 constitutes a very real danger, for there it seriously cramps the enemy game. Once the pawn threatens to go to KB5, it is best pre- vented by the counter-advance P—-KB4, if that move be possible. This counter-advance, which generally produces equality, must have been pre- pared several moves ahead. A further advance of the King’s Bishop’s pawn to KB6 1s very often catastrophic in its effect. If the pawn can stay there, it is really crushing for it supports all kinds of mating attacks, while, if it is captured, the King’s position is broken up. In position No. 228 1.R —KKtl was played, and there followed the Queen sacrifice (typical of positions characterised by a Rook at KKtl and a hostile pawn at KB3) 1....Q~P, ch; 2.K xQ, R —R4, mate. No 228 Position No. 229 shows exactly the same thing. If 1... KBxkKt?, there follows 2.PxB, R(Kt2) -Ktl; 3.QxP,ch, KxQ; 4. R-—R3, mate. In the actual game Black avoided the mistake. The play was 1....B-B4; 2.Q-R6, Q-Ql]; 3.Q-Kt5, Kt-Q3!', by which Black decided the game in his favour, since there followed (on account , ? , BxKt No. 230 a 1. R-R8, ch!, K xR; LG THE MIDDLE GAME of the threat of Kt-~K5 or Kt-—Kl) 4.PxKt In position No. 230 the pawn at KB6 permitted a Rook No. 229 and Black had obtained command of the strategic point sacrifice, with an immediate mate: 152 his KB3. fem © Heck x Ss ee XS WA NEN Vt \\ WS NN VAN 8 a S _* 8 Wim ous te Qe SS AA Wy WS . \ we Xd Balt SMO a A te We Wh WY LV mie NG Rs We bal Vee AQ Hl WS WSS \\ “SS cy (% NYY, SY NX \ a4 — KB8—and Q — Kt8, mate could Ye 2.Q—-Q8, ch, K-—R2; 3.Q not be prevented. 1.... P — B6, ch; continuation Kl? because of Q-Kt3,ch, followed by 3. B-Kl1 (if Q — Q6, ch; fol- mate), Q — Kt3, ch, Q -— Kt7, Q-—Q6, ch; 4. K-Ktl, Q-—Kt3, ch; 5.Q—Kt3, Q-—K5 and (the Black wins, for after any move of the Bishop Q—Kt8, ch plays a very important part in mate — Q — Kt3, ch; 4. Q —-Kt3, Q — K5 leads to the same position, only sooner), bringing about the mate: 2. K —Ktl, Q —Kt8, ch; 3. B — The play was: Kl!—not Q Q — Kt8, ch!; 3.Q —K1?,then 3.... 2.K -Bl 4. K -Ktl, Q — Kt7, lowed by N \ WD \\ Bo Se In the following example also (No. 231), a pawn at KB6 No 231 THE MIDDLE GAME 153 leads to mate; while K-B1 is followed by Q—-K7, ch and Q xB, mate; and 6.Q-B7,ch is useless because of 6.... K —Kt3; 7. Q —Kt3, ch, K —R2. THE ATTACK ALONG THE KING’s BisHop’s FILE The opening of the King’s Bishop’s file for the Rooks is not nearly as dangerous as that of the King’s Knight’s or even the King’s Rook’s file. Nevertheless, it is an advantage which must not be underestimated. It usually results from an ex- change of Bishops at K3. Steinitz strongly recommended this exchange because of the doubled pawns produced at the enemy’s K3 and K4. In direct contradiction to this, as to so many other ideas of that great chess thinker, I have always held the view that the slight and, indeed, even questionable No. 232 ty ty Sgt £22 WG tA / ‘4 4 Ww WN iS . pee IW WW WS ‘X SON NN WA SS S aS Fé WY NN ‘\ SS N\A SS WAY Lacs NN NWS disadvantage (for the doubled oe Z “Y pawns command the whole “ny yy YY 4 yyy centre) is more than compen- 4 fH CAB he Yy ji y sated by the advantage of the Vy Rg Uy Y open King’s Bishop’s file for the BY LG \ WS \\ SWS De WN LM N Rook. I have so prevailed with this view that nowadays among good players this exchange is very rarely seen. Positions Nos. 232 and 233 admirably illustrate these considerations. In the symmetrical position No. 232 (brought about by the moves 1. P—~K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt—-KB3, Kt—QB3; 3. B — B4, Kt—B3; 4. P—Q3, B-B4; 5. Kt —- B3, P — Q3) the play was: 6.B-K3, BxB?; 7.P xB, Kt -QR4 (this second mistake, which leads to the opening of another file for a White Rook, was always Steinitz’s sequel to the first. Naturally! One mistake inevitably leads to another. In conjunction with the Rooks posted in the King’s Bishop’s file, the Bishop would constitute a lasting menace to Black’s KB2, therefore it is desirable to get rid of it), 8. B-Kt3, KtxB; 9. RPxKt (along these two open files the Rooks are magnificently effective), Kt —Kt5 (Steinitz always played thus in order to continue with P — KB3 to lessen the subsequent pressure along ‘SSS [het Do» SON WEA mE ~ SS N 154 THE MIDDLE GAME the King’s Bishop’s file); 10. Q -Q2, P —- KB4 (in similar posi- tions I have recommended this move as the only possibility of perhaps obtaining equality for by it Black also gets an open King’s Bishop’s file. Here, however, the manceuvre does not suffice); 11.PxP,BxP; 12. Castles (KR) (we see that White is completely and beautifully developed while Black has only two pieces in play, one of which, the Bishop, is threatened by the Rook—Kt x P followed by RxB can be played—while the other, the Knight, will be displaced at KR3. White stands decidedly better, while Black is already involved in difficulties, the main cause of which is the exchange of Bishops at White’s K3). The continuation was 12....Castles; 13. P—R3, Kt-R3! (if Kt-B3?, then KtxP! followed by R xB); 14.P —-K4, B-Q2; 15. P— Q4, Kt - B2 (15.... Px P, 16.Q xP, P —-QKt3 was better); 16.PxP, PxP, 17. KR-QI (forcing the win of either the Queen’s Rook’s pawn or the King’s, for a move of the Bishop is followed by a double exchange at Black’s Q1), Kt -Q3; 18. KtxP. White, with a good posi- tion and a strong passed pawn to the good, must win. In position No. 233 the play was: 1.... B-Kt4, 2. P-KKt3 (to prevent Kt-B5), Bx B?; 3.PxB!, K-Rl; 4.R-B2 (now the pressure along the eee King’s Bishop’s file lasts for 20 tt % Jt dip “27 ~=— moves. We see that White pA eZ Xe Z has much the freer game, on z me 2 account of his possession of yy Eg Ah VY the half-open file. Black has YW By &# BY no such file at his disposal, and age Ma Aa Ws therefore his Rooks are con- EUG, YY YY YG ae SY: oe MRT Up demned to passivity), P - QB3; Yi GY Wy GY RS. B — Kt3, P — B3 (according to 8 YY Steinitz’s precept); 6. B-K6 Md s ° . ey” Hy Y gaw” (in order to establish the Bishop ae 7 Yo by P-Q5, if Black played Q —-K2), R —-Kl (now 7. P -Q5 would be bad, for after 7.... Kt —B1!, the Bishop would have no retreat—8. B-B5?, P-—KKt3; 9. B—-Kt4?, P-KR4. But now there is another possibility for White); 7. B — B7, R-K2; 8. Bx Kt, P x B (now the pawn at Black’s KKt3 pro- THE MIDDLE GAME 155 vides a target for attack by P—-KR4 and P—KR35, and if, in reply to the last move, Black, in order not to open the King’s Rook’s file, plays P - KKt4, then P — R6 leads to the breaking up of the entire King’s side, since then the King’s Bishop’s pawn is untenable); 9. P—-KR4! (otherwise Black, by playing P~—KKt4, could bring his pawns into a better formation), Q-K1; 10.R-K1 (the pawn at K4 needs protection), K —-Ktl; 11. R-Q2! (White intends to close the centre by P —Q5, so that he can proceed with the main attack without being worried about his King’s pawns), Q-B2; 12. P—Q5, P-QB4 (otherwise White, by playing PxP can open the Queen’s file for an attack on the Queen’s pawn. Naturally this closing of the centre is quite acceptable to White); 13. R-KB1, Q-K1; 14. R-Rz2 (the plan of attack now is P—-R85, followed, after P-KKt4, by P—R6 and then, after PxP, by either Rx PorQxP. But it is not quite so simple. White has to take into account the good defensive moves of his opponent), R-QI (Black cannot undertake anything effective, and simply because he has no open file for his Rooks); 15. Q-Kté! (15. P-—R5 would be premature since Black could defend himself quite well by 15....PxP; 16. RxP, Q - Kt3!), P—-QKt4 (an attempt at a counter-attack on the Queen’s side, which, however, gets no further than the em- bryonic stage); 16. K -Kt2! (White conducts the difficult attack with great circumspection. He is preparing to play P-R5, followed, after P—-Kt4, by Q-B5!—not P-R6 be- cause of Q-Kt3! with good protection—and then, after Q - Q2, by Q-Kt6, followed, if Q-K1?, by RxP!. With White’s King at Ktl, however, this line of play would allow a counter-attack by Q-Kt5, instead of Q-K1?), P —Kt5; 17, P — B4 (otherwise Black would obtain the Queen’s Knight’s file for his Rooks), Q-R5 (a desperate sortie, but against purely passive defence White’s attack is bound to succeed); 18. P— R65! (much stronger than Q xP), P-Kt4; 19. P—R6 (this undermines the King’s Bishop’s pawn so that the attack along the King’s Bishop’s file now easily succeeds), Q ~ B7, ch; 20. R -B2,QxBP; 21.P xP, K xP; 22. Q -—B5 (the sacrifice R x P would also win, but the Queen move threatens not only Black’s KB3 but also his KR2), K — Ktl; 23. Q x BP, Q x P, ch; 24, K —- Kt] and Black resigned. 156 THE MIDDLE GAME THr ATTACK ON THE Pormnt KB7 This attack, either by the Queen supported by a minor piece —generally the King’s Bishop or King’s Knight—or by the King’s Bishop supported by the King’s Knight, occurs very frequently, either before or after the opponent has castled. After he has castled, it is always the advance of his King’s Bishop’s pawn which provokes this attack. Therefore, before moving this pawn you must always ask yourself the question whether there is not a dangerous attack threatened along the diagonal from your KKtl to your QR7, as in position No. 234. Here the threat is 1....Q9—Kt3, ch; 2. K-—Rl, Kt -—B7, ch after which White must sacrifice the Exchange (3. R x Kt), No. 234 No. 235 f Ja Ld od %Z ZG S y a4 7 PS aay Ss Ve Yi CW 3G, Us, Upe/, CS VY Upp, Up yy Y, Y wr wf Oe UU WW BE GONE: p Y ‘yyy ae or Tos, a Yi; Ve RR MAW 7/0@ here not on account of the threat to his Queen but because, if 3. K —-Ktl?, Black can bring about a “smothered” mate: 3.... Kt —R6, ch; 4. K —R1, Q—Kt8, ch!; 5.R x Q, Kt —- B7, mate. White apparently does not see the threat and plays 1.Q-—Q3!. If Black now wins the Exchange by 1....Q- Kt3, ch; 2. K-Rl, Kt-—B7, ch?; 3. RxKt, QxR, then he has overestimated the guilelessness of his opponent, who now traps the Queen by 4. B-K3!. Therefore, caution, whenever the Queen enters into the thick of the fray! Always work out in advance for her—as, indeed for the other pieces—a safe line of retreat! And never underestimate your opponent’s moves or his strength! " In position No. 235 after 1....B-B4,ch; 2.K-RIl THE MIDDLE GAME 157 (2. Kt-Q4, BxKt,ch; 3.PxB, QxP,ch makes matters worse as after 4. K —Rl, Kt—B7, ch Black forces a mate; if 5. K—-Ktl, the smothered mate, if 5.RxKt, then by 5.... Q — Q8, ch, etc. the mate on the back rank), Kt — B7, ch; 3. R x Kt Black could have won the Exchange by 3....B xR, but he wondered whether he couldn’t do better by 3.... Q — Q8, ch and thus discovered the charming Problem mate: 3.... Q-Q8, ch!; 4. Kt-Ktl, QxKt, ch!; 5.KxQ, R-Q8, mate. Therefore, when you have an advantageous move, always consider carefully whether there is not an even better one. In position No. 236 the play was: 1. P x P, Kt x KP and now White overlooked the threatened check at his KR4 with its catastrophic effect and played 2. B —Q3? (Kt — B3 was correct). Black then played Lug iy 2....Q — R85, ch eae Tas ATA 998 we Q- . Now, natur- g te” tts Yat) ally, 3. K-Bl was out of the mR ohms question because of 3.... Q — B7, a Yj i Yy, mate. If, instead, 3. K-K2, Yptkti Y then 3.... Q < B7, ch; 4.K — Ql, ia, AS MS , i QxKtP winning the Rook, Yi g Vi z 2 Yi while, finally, if 3.K-Ql,then ZZWZy B — ee 3.... Kt -B7, ch, winning the : Rook. Therefore White played 3. P—Kt3 and after 3.... Kt x KtP he could have escaped with the loss of the Exchange by 4.PxKt, QxR. However, he played 4. Kt -B3 and now Black could have won the Rook by 4....Q-—K2,ch; 5.K-B2, KtxR,ch but then after 6. K —Kt2 the Knight would have been lost. Black hoped to gain more from the exposed position of the King by playing 4....Q-—R4. The continuation was: 5.R-—KKtl, Q~x Kt; 6.RxKt, R-Kl,ch; 7.K-—Q2, Q-B7,ch; 8. K-QI, R -K8, mate. M, La THE BROKEN-UP CASTLED POSITION By this is to be understood a castled position in which either the King’s Knight’s pawn, by making a capture, has trans- ferred itself to the King’s Bishop’s file or, less frequently, to 158 THE MIDDLE GAME the King’ s Rook’s file, or is missing altogether. Then the King is robbed of his most important supporting pawn and is exposed to many attacks. The whole King’s side is weakened, and the points KB3, KB4, KR2, KR3 and KRé4 are particu- larly weak. Frequently sacrifices are made in order to break up the enemy King’s position in this way, and then to storm it with a rapid mating attack. Here are some examples: In position No. 237 the play was: 1. Kt x P,Q xB; 2. Kt x Kt, ch, PxKt; 3.QxB, B-K3; 4.Q-Kt3,ch, K-—-RI; eee 5. B — Kt2 (now the weakness at 7 Black’s KB3 is demonstrated), Y - , ; W778 7 Me We Y 6 i = ery Roce Yt a Y/ 4 2G 3 ‘ x Te 3 : 7 x Yn 4 ae and White had won a piece. We by 87 & Y, Black’s KB3 would have been Uy ) By YY WY untenable even if his Queen Ma 12m a ; Wy Ma ty, had been at QKt3 and so, after We, ‘Zi Za Wa +5. B-Kt2, had been able to , Y Y; guard it by 5....Q—QI1. White tye tpy & A 4 a, i, LY * iG would then have carried the : attack to a victorious conclusion & YXGYEYWL® in the following way: 6.Q- Kt5! (not 6. Q—-—Ré4, for then Black could escape with the loss of a second pawn by 6.... Kt-K4; 7.KtxKt, PxKt; 8.BxP,ch), Kt-—K4; 7. Ktx Kt!!, PxQ (or 7....PxKt!; 8.QxP,ch, P-B3; 9.QxB); 8. KtxP,ch, K-—Ktl; 9. Kt-—R6, mate. This mating combination is also of frequent occurrence. If, in- stead of 6....Kt—K4, Black played 6....Kt—Q5, then 7.Q-R6 and White wins at least the Knight which cannot move on account of B x P, ch, eg. 7.... Kt-B4; 8. Bx P, ch, K-Ktl; 9.Q-Kt5, ch, Kt-—Kt2; 10.QxKt, mate. Ii, however, White’s King were still at KKt1l, then Black would still have a defence and, indeed, a very effective one, wz. (after 6.... Kt —-Q5; 7. Q -R6) 7.... Kt x Kt, ch; 8. P x Kt (if K - Rl, then Kt -K4), R-Ktl, ch!; 9. K-R1, R-Kt3 and every- thing would be guarded. This occupation of the open file, by which Black makes a virtue of necessity, is always very effect- ive and very often neutralizes the disadvantage of a broken-up King’s position. This, whenever possible, is the best defence in such positions, since it offers the chance of a counter attack. SSH ANAL NS SS —_ te ~< GY EY ESS THE MIDDLE GAME 159 In position No. 238 Black offered the sacrifice of the Knight in order to break up White’s castled position. The play was 1.... Kt —- B6, ch; 2. Px Kt (K —RI was better), Q — Kt4, ch; 3. K —Rl, Px P (threatening mate at KKt7 and also attacking the Bishop); 4.R—-KKtl, PxB,ch; 5.P-—K4, Q~xR, ch; 6. K x Q, P—K8 (Q), ch, and Black won a Rook. In position No. 239 the play was. 1.P-K5, Bx Kt? (Kt -—K1 was better. Naturally Black could not take the pawn, since after Q x Q he would lose a Bishop), 2. Px Kt. White here offers the sacrifice of the Exchange in order to No 239 HY, Yo BeZY BRR US Re UA & by uw? Up. 7 Ef Fy fl’ he, Yh Uy Wy 4 g Yl we 7 ; UY JAD 4 LEARY BRA break up the enemy’s castled position. 2....Bx BP (after 2....BxR, 3.PxB White would have the advantage of two minor pieces for a Rook); 3.BxB, BxR; 4.R<B! (R-K7 or B x P would be parried by Q - Kt5), Px B. Now the King’s side attack succeeded very quickly. There followed: 5. Kt — Q5, Q-Ql, 6.R-Q3, K-Rl, 7.Q-KR4, K-R2, 8. R-KR3 and the mate could not be prevented, eg. 8.... K —Kt3; 9.Q-R5, ch, K—Kt2; 10.QxRP, ch, K-Ktl, 11.Q-R?7 or R8, mate. * In position No. 240 Black (Morphy) sacrificed no less than a Queen in order to break up the enemy King’s position. 1....QxBil; 2.PxQ, R—Kt3, ch; 3. K-—Rl, B —R6 (threat- ening 4....B—Kt7, ch; 5. K-Ktl, BxP, mate. 4. R-Ktl 160 THE MIDDLE GAME is useless because of 4....R xR, ch, followed by R—K8, ch, and mate next move); 4.R-Q1, B-Kt7,ch; 5.K-Ktl, QB xP, ch; 6. K-Bl, R-Kt7!!. This is much stronger than 6.... B-Kt7, ch; 7.K—Ktl, B-R6,ch; 8.K-—-Rl, BxP which Black actually played and which won back the Queen since the mate by B —-Kt7 could be averted only by Q-BIl. On the other hand, the continuation 6.... B —Kt7, ch (instead of 6.... RR —Kt7!!); 7. K —-Ktl, B —K5, ch!!; also leads to mate but takes a move longer, e.g. 8. K —- Bl, B —-KB4 (threatening B-R6, mate); 9.Q—-K2, B—R6,ch; 10.K-—KI1, R-—Kt8, mate. The continuation after 6....R —Kt7!! is 7.Q-—Q3 (Black threatens RxP followed by R-R8, mate), R-xP, ch; 8. K —Ktl, R — Kt7, ch; 9. K-Bl or RI, R—Kt8, mate. No. 240 No. 241 Wh YU". Yyfly y Yi , ae Ya a, Wj Wy yr yy dla After Black’s quiet 3rd move, B —- R6, White’s best move was 4, Q —Q3!, attacking the Rook with the intention of capturing it after 4....B—Kt7, ch; 5. K-Ktl, QBxP,ch. This plan Black could thwart by 4....P—KB4!, after which there would be nothing but 5.Q-B4,ch, K-Bl! (to prevent Q—-—B7); 6.Q —R4, BxR!; 7.QxP, B-—Kt7, ch; 8. K—Ktl, R -K8, mate. If, instead of 6.Q-R4, White plays 6. Q—-B4!, then 6....BxR; 7.QxP, ch, R-—B3; 8.QxP, R-K8 and Black wins. * Position No. 241 also admirably illustrates the danger of a broken-up castled position. Black has just made a capture at his KKt7. White guards the THE MIDDLE GAME 161 attacked Rook by the brilliant move 1.Q-B3!!. If 1... Q xQ, there follows 2.R-—Ktl, ch, K-—Rl1; 3. B—Kt?7, ch, K -Ktl; 4.BxP, ch, and mate next move. THe ATTACK ALONG THE KniqgutT’s FILE This attack is almost as strong as one along the open Rook’s file. If sufficient pieces are available for the attack, it is usually fairly simple to conduct. The best defence against the Rook on an open Knight’s file is the move P — Kt3, if the Rook’s and Bishop’s pawns guard Kt3. Against this triangle of pawns the Rooks bite on granite. In position No. 242 the play was 1. R-—KKtl, Kt-—K1 (in- stead of this insufficient guard, P—KKt3 was essential); No. 242 No. 243 a7, Ww Mey YG Zaye ‘. OE MT 2 ey al Me bh, «$a 8 ERI 56,8 _Y BM Bs te SAW Bie bo REY BR GY BERT ae me @ GYuve 8 24 Bie 2.KtxKtP!, KtxKt, 3.B-R6, B-B3, 4.Q-Kt3 or Kt — Q5, and White wins back at KKt7 the piece he has sacri- ficed and has the advantage. In position No. 243 Black defended his broken-up King’s position most brilliantly by a counter-attack along the King’s Knight’s file. We have already recommended this as the best defence (see No. 237). The splendid position of his Bishop called for it. The play was: 1....K—Rl!; 2.BxP,R —-KKtl!; 3.BxR, RxB; 4. R-—B2 (if P—- KKt3, then Q — B3), Q - B3. If White now guards his KKt2 by 5. Q - R3, then Black wins by 5.... Kt-Ktd; 6.R-B3, KtxB; 7.QxKt, R~xP, ch! M 162 THE MIDDLE GAME (not 7....QxR?, because of 8.QxBP,ch, R-Kt2; 9.QxR, ch! followed by 10.PxQ); 8. KxR, Q~xR, ch; 9. K —Ktl, Q — Kt7, mate. There followed, therefore (instead of 5.Q-R3) 5.K-—-BI, RxP; 6.Q-R4 (if 6....RxR, then 7.QxR, ch, K-K1; 8. Kt—-B6, ch, K-QI1?; 9.Q-B8, mate), R-—Kt8, ch!; 7. K —K2 (the Rook cannot be captured because of Q -—R8, mate), QxP, ch; 8. K —K3!, Q-—Q6, ch; 9. K-B4, Q-—K5, mate. * In position No, 244 Black played 1....BxKtP to recover a pawn already lost. But by the opening of the King’s Knight’s file he was “out of the frying-pan into the fire’. No. 244 No, 245 xD Ag Mt J we Se 4 4, a SES" t| #iw @ «2 Z g W4 J jy re a oe of bw ae Yt a Ys K ve Gla 2 We y, ey Wa, fe J a ey Ve, rae Y, ‘ 7 ie , B ip \ Va There followed: 2. KR — Ktl, B — B6 (Black had relied on this attack); 3.P-K6! (if now 3....BxKt, then White by 4,.BxP,ch, K-Ktl; 5.B-B6,ch, B-Kt5; 6.BxB, QxQ; 7.PxQ obtains a decisive superiority in material), B-—KB3 (if 3....R —KKtl, then White gets the advantage by 4,.RxP, RxR; 6.R-Ktl, B-Kt5; 6. P-R3); 4.QxP,ch!, BxQ; 5.BxB,ch, K-Ktl; 6. B-—B6, ch, B—Kt5; 7. R x Q, KR x R (if QR x R, then P —-K7!); 8. Bx R, R xB; 9. P—R3 and White wins a piece. In position No. 245 the surprising move 1. B — R6 is possible. If 1....PxB, then 2.Q-R5. The Queen cannot be taken because of the mate at Black’s QKt1, and, if the Black Queen THE MIDDLE GAME 163 plays to B5, then 3. P—Kt3 attacks her again and she must be sacrificed to guard against the mate. Position No. 246 provides a very pretty and typical example of an attack along the King’s Knight's file by the major pieces, with the support of the Queen’s Bishop. The play was: 1. P-B3!, PxP (otherwise Black, after B x Kt, would lose NOeza» the pawn at his K5); 2. Px P, type ““bG oo ZZ P- OKt4: 3. R-Ktl,R -KBl xe 4 cm tg (in order to guard his KKt2 8787 ee 2 by R- B2); 4. R-Q2!, R - B2; Yt -Y 5. B (Q2) —Kt2,P-QR4;6.Q- YY Wy $Y (the Queen wants to get Vy , to KR4 and KR6), Kt-Kl; _ #272 7.R-Kt5. This is playedin ZY YY GY yh order to continue with Q — R4. ts by If Black prevents this b Yip tees 8 0 of BR WH 7....P— RB. he creates for hin. Yi 7) El UU AY, Ld self a new weakness, which, after 8. R — Kt6 (threatening R x RP), K-—R2; 9. Q—-Kt3, Q —- K2, will be exploited by the Rook sacrifice at KR6, typical of such positions, viz. 10.Rx RP, ch!, PxR?; 11. Q—Kt6 or Kt8, mate, or 10....K x R?; 11. Q—Kt6, mate. If 10.... K—Ktl, then 11. Q-—Kt6 quickly leads to mate unless Black gives up the Knight by 11.... Kt — B3. Actually Black played 7....Q-—K2, the continuation being 8. Q — R4 (threatening Q — R6 followed by R — R5, after which Black’s King’s Rook’s pawn could not be saved), 8.... Kt — B3; 9. Q — R6 (threatening to win the Bishop by 10. B x Kt,Q x B!; 11.QxQ',RxQ; 12. R xP, ch, but not, however, 10. B x Kt, QB; 11.R~xP, ch? for then, after 11....R xR; 12.QxQ, R »>R, Black wins the Bishop, thus obtaining three pieces for the Queen. Never pay too high a price for a Queen!), P —-Kt3 (the best defence against a Rook attack along the King’s Knight’s file, but only if the neighbouring pawns are still at KB2 and KR2, so that against the triangle of pawns at KB2, KKt3 and KR2 the Rooks bite on granite); 10. R xP, ch!, PxR; 11.RxP,ch, R-Kt2; 12.BxKt and Black must sacrifice the Queen to avoid being mated. (If 12....R xR, then 13. Q xR, ch). sy YS WA WS WX WY ine GN Ny cd 164 THE MIDDLE GAME Instead of massing two or even three pieces in the King’s Knight’s file, it is sometimes possible to make a sudden Rook sacrifice at KKt7, if a substitute for the Rook is to hand, and if the attack can be continued with check after check. Thus in the pretty example No. 247: The play was: 1. B x P!! (making a double clearance, for the Rook and at the same time for the Queen), P x B; 2. R x P, ch!, KxR (if 2...K-—-Rl1, then 3.Q-KB6, followed, if 3.... QxR,ch, by 4.R-—Ktl, mate, or, if 3....Q-—B6, ch, by 4,R-—Kt2, mate); 3.Q-—B6,ch, K-—Ktl; 4. R—Ktl, ch, Q-Kt5; 5.RxQ,ch, PxR (White has won the Queen but at the too high price of three pieces. Now, however, his united passed pawns bring about a win.) The continua- tion was: 6. P- B5, KR - QBI; 7. P —K6, B - B3; 8. Q — B7, ch, K-R1; 9.P-B6 (threaten- ing Q —-Kt7, mate), R —-KKtl; 10. Q - B7! (this, in conjunc- tion with the following move, is the only correct continua- tion of the attack), QR —QBI; 11.Q-K5, P—Q5, ch; 12. K-Ktl, P-Q6; 13. P —B7, ch, R-Kt2; 14.P-K7, P—KR3; 15. P-B8(Q), ch, RxQ; 16. PxR (Q), ch, K-—R2; 17. either Q x R, mate. At the fourth move Black could have sacrificed his Queen at his KKt3, which would have delayed and, perhaps, even have prevented the establishment of the passed pawns. The con- tinuation would have been: 5. R xQ,ch, PxR; 6. Q~ P, ch, K-RI1; 7.P-K6, BxP (if B-B3 or K1, then White, by QxP, would again establish the united passed pawns); 8. Q —R6, ch! (not Q x B at once, for then Black would guard his Bishop’s pawn by R-KB1), K-Ktl; 9.Q~xB, ch, K — Kt2; 10. Q x BP and White again wins by the strength of his pawns. As we have already seen, the Queen’s Bishop is a very effective support for the major pieces in an attack along the King’s Knight’s file. If it can be posted at KB6, then again THE MIDDLE GAME 165 there follow typical sacrificial mating combinations. No. 248 shows a very pretty example. The play was: 1....B —-B6, 2. R-KKtl?,Q xR, ch!; 3. K xQ, R-KR8 and the mate by R-R8 could not be prevented. Better was 2. R —-R2!, Q-—Kt5 (threatening 3.... B —K7, ch; 4.K—-K1, B-—Q6, ch, winning the Queen, or—instead of B — Q6, ch—4.... Q - Kt8, ch, winning a Rook), 3.R-KI1?, Q -—Kt8, ch', 4.KxQ, RxR, mate. If 3.Q-Q2, then 3... R—-KKt3 (B-—K7, ch, forcing White to sacrifice his Queen, would also be sufficient, now, however, the threat 1s Q —Kt8, mate); 4.R-—R1, Q~—Kt7,ch, 5.K—KI, QxR, mate. * A Knight posted at KB5 1s exceptionally effective for an attack on the point KKt7. (If the opponent has castled on No 248 GY Y % Y Ve, Y “iif 4 vA as x Aa o , li, YEG 4 “bg og / g JZ di Z Y Y M4 Ye” 9 OY 7, ay Eh a Fy hi Baw 2 x WY Yege the Queen’s side, the attack will be on the point QKt7 and the Knight should be posted at QB5.) A Knight posted here i8 a@ permanent danger to the King; it needs only the Queen to come up—and mate at KKt7 is threatened. If the Knight is driven back by P —-KKt3, then that move results in a decided loosening of the King’s position. Very often the Knight can be sacrificed at Kt7, the breaking-up of the King’s side being followed by a mating attack, or, at the very least, by the re- gaining of the piece with advantage. In position No. 249the play is 1. Kt x P!,K x Kt; 2. Bx Kt, ch (not 2. B—R6, ch, because the King does not go to Kt1, allow- ing Q-—Kt5, ch and Q-Kt7, mate, but to Rl, whereupon lacs \ WS 166 THE MIDDLE GAME Black has the advantage), Kt xB; 3.Q-Kt5,ch, K-—Rl; 4,Q x Kt, ch, and White has won a pawn. In position No. 250 the same sacrifice is threatened, wiz.: 1KtxP, KxKt; 2.BxKt,ch, KtxB; 3. Q-—Kt5, ch, followed by 4.QxKt,ch; or 2.Q-R6,ch, K-Ktl; ecaED 3.BxKt. However, Black has the move and parries the threat Wy by 1.... Kt-Q4. Thereupon — Wj “ rt Me White gains the advantage by _om Va 3% the prettymove 2. B-—R6. The yy z YW iy Y Z\1 King’s Knight’s pawn is doubly Yj 7 ee Py i | es at ene ac Y a 7 ti ne op offered him, en mate ; Ya, SAF follows in two moves: 3. Q- A, oat YG Y 2] Kt4 or Kt3, ch and 4. Q — Kt7, BL RY Yj Gg a Y, mate. If 2....P—KKt3, then pee W 7 yyy fer fas White wins the Exchange by a, 7 3.BxR. It is still worse for Black if, instead of playing 1.... Kt -Q4, he tries to dislodge White’s Knight by 1....P—-KKt3? White can then win a pawn by 2. Bx Kt, KtxB! (if Px Kt?, then Q-—Kt5 or Kt3, mate); 3.QxKt, PxKt; 4.QxBP. The loosening of Black’s castled position is, however, so dangerous, and the attack- ing position of White’s pieces so strong, that a mating attack is possible as soon as the Knight can check at K7. Therefore, after 1....P—KKt3?, the correct, forcible and pretty play is 2. P-QKt4!, Qx BP; 3. Kt -K7, ch, K—Kt2 (if 3...K—-Rl1?, then 4.BxKt,ch, KtxB; 5.Q~x Kt, mate); 4. Q—R6, ch, K—RI; 5.QxR, ch!, Kt x Q; 6. B x Kt mate. (This is more precise than 5.BxKt,ch, Kt xB; 6.Q xR, ch, Kt-—Ktl; 7. Q x Kt, mate.) Needless to say, the Queen is the most important piece in all these mating attacks. In conjunction with a minor piece, or even with a pawn at KR6 or KB6, she can mate at KKt7. Sometimes, although less frequently than a Knight, a Bishop can be sacrificed at KKt7 to demolish the King’s position. Thus in example No. 251 the play was: 1. P-—R65, Kt — K2; THE MIDDLE GAME 167 2.BxKKtP!, K xB; 3.Q-—Kt5, ch, K-RI1; 4. Q-—BB6, ch, K-—-Ktl, 5. P—R6, Kt—B4; 6. Bx Kt—and Q-Kt7, mate could not be prevented. If, instead, 3.... Kt—Kt3, then 4,P—R6, ch, K-—Ktl; 5. Q-B6, followed by 6. Q—Kt7, mate. If Black’s Queen were at QKtl or QB2 she could prevent the maté by playing to K4. The impossibility of your opponent being able to guard his KKt2 must be exactly No. 251 No. 252 Y, Ye, Ja, aw a Ae) a Lup OaRe Rawr ces Gin Cas wal ow YrGay 7 YS K RG a OB URURT YW eS BERT RBI BRB BEE i 7 YG & wy Wve OE ascertained before making the sacrifice. If it does not result in mate, then you will generally lose the game. THe Pornt KR6 as A TARGET FOR ATTACK This stratagem, the attack on the point KR6, frequently occurs, often even in the Opening (as in the present example). In position No. 252 the positions are identical. (The previous moves were: 1.P—K4, P-K4, 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt -—QB3; 3. B-B4, B-B4, 4. Kt -B3, Kt -B3). Now White castles, which is here somewhat premature. The development by P—Q3 and B - K3 or KKt5 is preferable. If Black now also castles, then the positions are again identical. But Black, instead, exploits his opponent’s slight mistake by playing 5.... P—Q3!, threatening a troublesome pin by B-KKt5. White hinders this in the most ingenuous way by 6. P -KRB3, without dreaming that after he has castled on the King’s side and his opponent has not, this apparently harmless move is in reality a decisive mistake. Black now plays 6.... P—-KR3!. Duo si faciunt idem, non est idem! The very move that is for 168 THE MIDDLE GAME one player decisively bad is for the other decisively good! Black continues with P -KKt4, with the intention of opening the King’s Knight’s file by P—Kt5. He obtains a very power- ful, generally an irresistible attack, for which his opponent, by playing P-KR3, has given him an objective. Jf you have castled on the King’s side and your opponent has not, you must always beware of making this move. You should never, unless of necessity or to gain an advantage, move the pawns in front of the castled King, for each pawn move loosens the position. Occasionally, however, when both players have castled on the King’s side, the pawn at one’s opponent’s KR3 provides WESGER a target for attack, as in posi- tion No. 253. Ui, YORE WG jkQThe pi > J... P-Kt65; J JIA Gt 2. RPP. (this exchange 4 tke We Yih A ‘yy ly YW P AZ yy Moves the supporting King’s Vy 5 A Yi oY Rook’s pawn and opens the Yj z ae King’s Bishop’s file for Black. Kt - K5atonce would have been Wf BY, 4 better), BPxP; 3. Kt—K5, 2 BX Wy 2 Q- R4! (this guards the King’s A RY, White's Ko, and threatens the Yy, GY Ys 1 Se es » an pipet aa he Y)p a PY advance of the King’s Knight’s pawn which can be prevented only by the further loosening move P — Kt3); 4. P x P, B x Kt; 5.P xB, P-Kt6! (threatening Q-R7, mate), 6. BP xP, Kt x P (threatening not only Q — R8, mate but also Kt - K7, ch, winning the Queen), 7. R—KB3! (parrying both threats), RxR; 8 PxR, R-KBI! (threatening 9.... Q—-R8, ch, 10.K-B2, RxP, mate. With 8....Q—R8,ch; 9. K-B2, Q -R7,ch; 10. K-—K1 Black would have attained nothing. 8....Q x BP would have been a terrible oversight, the reply being 9. Q —Kt6, ch); 9. P — B4 (the only move, for if, instead, B-—Q2, then RxP, attacking the Queen and threatening Q — R8, mate), Kt — K7, ch; 10. K — B2, Kt x P (much stronger than winning the Exchange by Kt x R, for now White’s King is completely exposed). If now 11.BxKt, then 11... RxB,ch; 12. K-K1, QxP,ch; 13.Q-K2, R-K65, or, if THE MIDDLE GAME 169 (instead of 12. K —K1) 12. K—Kt2, then 12.... Q —Kté4, ch; 13. Q —- Kt3 (if K — R2, then R —- R5, ch), R—KKt5. In each case Black wins the Queen. White actually played 11.R-Ktl,ch, the continuation being J1...K-Rl1; 12.BxKt, RxB,ch, 13. K—-K1 (if 13. K-Kt3, then 13....Q-—R5,ch'!; 14. K-—Kt2, R-B7, mate), Q x P, ch, and Black wins the Queen, if 15. Q —K2, by 15.... R — K5, or, if 15. K -Q2, by 15.... R —- Q5. THE ATTACK ALONG THE Rook’s FILE The opening of the King’s Rook’s file for the Rook generally gives an even more dangerous attack than does the open- ing of the King’s Knight's file. The type is shown in position No 254. This position can arise, al- though only as a result of weak play, out of the Giuoco Piano (1, P-—-K4, P-K4, 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B- B4, B-B4) with the con- |} z tmnuation 4.P-~B3, Kt—B3, (A y 5. Kt~KKt5 (an altogether premature attack on the point KB7), Castles; 6. P-Q3, P- KR3; 7. P~KR4! White offers the sacrifice of the Knight in order, if it is accepted, to secure in return the open King’s Rook’s file for the Rook. The attack which results is so violent that it very quickly brings about a catastrophe. After 7....PxKt?, 8. PxP, Kt —R2; 9.Q-R5 White threatens Q x Kt, mate, and Black is lost. If 9....R—K1, White does not capture the Knight, as then the King escapes via KB1 to K2, but mates in three moves—10. Q x P, ch!, K-Rl; 11.R~xKt, ch!, KxR; 12. Q-—R5, mate. Black should not have accepted the sacrifice of the Knight, so frequently offered in similar positions. The opening of the Rook’s file was too dangerous. No. 254 / We / , Jhb 170 THE MIDDLE GAME Similarly, in position No. 255: Here White played 1. R-—Kt6. Black could not take the Rook, for, if 1....PxR, then 2. Px P, Q-—Q3; 3. Q-—R35, ch, K-Ktl; 4.Q-R7, mate. Black, therefore, played 1... P—K4. After 2. R(Ktl) —Kt4, it would still be a mis- take for Black to accept the offer of the Rook, for after the removal of his Queen’s Rook’s pawn—2....P xR; 3. PxP, Q — Q3—his King would be defenceless against the attack of the major pieces. The continuation would be 4. R —R4, ch, K —Ktl; 5. Q-R5, ch, followed by 6.Q-R8, mate. (This, No. 255 No. 256 eke 7 Oe t,5 “aS wa ee a i a a” 01 fg Veet Yy Z ty oh yi we As yy §% Ay & ty Z y, Y/V 7 ‘y 3 Wb though not so pretty, is more precise than the often occurring Rook sacrifice by 5.R-R8,ch, KxR, 6.Q -RS5, ch, K —Ktl; 7. Q-R7, mate). 7 SSP * Position No. 256 shows the identical combination, with the Rook’s file already opened. Black was threatened with the loss of his Queen by R — R4, ch. The play was: 1.... K -Ktl; 2. R -KR4, Q —- K4, 3. R - R8, ch, K xR; 4.Q-R4, ch, K-~—Ktl, 5.Q-R7, mate. The typical mate by the Queen and the supporting pawn at KKt6. (Natur- ally, by interposing his Qucen at R4, Black could have delayed the mate for a move.) * Position No. 257 shows a more complicated, but quite similar combination. White’s Queen was attacked. He played her to Kt6, where she threatened to mate at Kt7. A brilliant move! If l.... THE MIDDLE GAME 171 PxQ, there follows 2.PxP,ch, B-R2; 3.R~xB, ch, K-Ktl; 4. R(B7)xP,ch, K-Bl. Thus if the offer of the Queen is accepted, White obtains the terrible doubled Rooks on the seventh rank, whose effect he further strengthens by 5. B-R6. He threatens R — R8, ch, and mate next move. If Black attempts to stop this by 5....Q—Ktl, then 6. R - QB7, mate. * In position No. 258 the play is: 1.... R(Q]1) —R1; 2. P — B3 (to make an outlet for the King. This, however, is immediately closed), P — Kt6!. Now the mate could still be hindered if the Rook’s file could be closed by 3.B-B65,ch followed by No. 257 No. 258 vi MAK Bem Y Tid Vy Oe a VO Wir Y y 'Y Y Y y YEU YW Yigt? eg Mm 89 1 BRY m7 7 nogveig 4.B-—R3. But White cannot parry the threat of mate, for to 3.B-B5,ch Black can reply with the generous move 3....Q-—K3!. If White captures the Queen, then, after 4.... P xB, he is helpless against the threat of R-R8, mate. If, instead, 4. B —R3!, then, naturally, there follows 4.... R x B; 5. P xR, Q x RP, followed by Q — R8, mate. * % Tug ATTACK ON THE Point KR7 WITH QUEEN AND BIsHoP Whereas in the previous examples the most important feat- ure of the attack along the Rook’s file has been the co-operation of the Rooks with the Queen, in the following it is a minor piece, particularly the King’s Bishop, which influences the character of the attack and aids the Queen in giving mate. These attacks by the Queen and the King’s Bishop on the point KR7 are exceptionally frequent. 172 THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 259 the obvious continuation 1.QxP, ch is not good, since the King escapes via KB1, and after 2. Q — R8, ch, goes to K2 where he is quite safe. Indeed, Black then threatens to attack along the King’s Rook’sfile by R - KRI1. The correct play for White is to prevent the flight of the King by playing 1.Q-R6!. He then threatens the typical mate in four moves at KB7, wz. 2.BxP,ch, K-—RI; 3. B—-Kt6, ch!, K — Ktl; 4. Q —R7, ch, K —-Bl; 5.QxP, mate. Black cannot guard his KB2 by 1.... Q or R — K2, for then he closes a flight- square for his King so that there follows 2.Q*xP,ch and 3. Q- R8, mate. Obviously, the guard by R or Q - BI is still worse, on account of Qx P, mate. The only correct guard is 1... P-KB4. This ends the attack with the Queen and Bishop. Now, however, a Rook attack is immediately decis- ive: 2. R — K3!, threatening either the typical mate by Z, ° bo CX Y; TC. He ie SSNN WSs — SW N \\ te ae WH LS QS Sieg ahve POR der \\ per ee ty le YY YZ 3. R —-Kt3, ch, K-Rl1, 4.Q- 7 Te J Ce y a Kt7, mate, or the win of ae - Un 2s son Yi Queen. If 2....Q-Bl, then Wf Gy, Se YY, ne there follows the equally typi- “SN cal mate by 3. R-Kt3, ch, pee pow, ae K-RI1; 4. Q-B6, ch and as 5.QxQ, mate. If 2... K—-Rl, then White wins by 3. R-RB3, K -Ktl!; 4. R —-Kt3, ch!, etc. (not QxP, ch, because then again the King escapes). Neither does 2....P—-KB3 help Black. There follows 3. R—Kt3,ch, K-—B2; 4. Q-Kt7, mate. In the actual game Black tried to guard his KKt2 by 2.... QxP. But White drove the Queen off that diagonal by 3. P—- QB3! (if Q —-R1?, then R — Kt3, ch, followed by mate), so that Black, having only the choice between the loss of his Queen or mate, resigned. (The transposition 3. R —Kt3, ch, K-—Rl1; 4. P-B3 would have been less precise—4.... Q — K4; 5. P—-KB4, Q - B4, ch; 6. K—RI, although Black would still have been lost—6....R —KKtl; 7.Q-B6, ch, followed by 8. Q xR, mate). <4 “ee sy ro WSS Position No. 260 shows, although in a somewhat masked THE MIDDLE GAME 173 form, the typical mating attack on KR7 with Queen and Bishop. The play is: 1. Kt-—K7, ch!, Qx Kt; 2. R-R8, ch!, KxR (if 2....K —-B2, then 3.Q-R5, ch, P—Kt3, 4.QxP, mate), 3. Q — R5, ch, K — Ktl; 4.Q — R7, ch', K — B2, 5.B — Kt6, mate. (This mating continuation is more precise than the typical one by 4. B-R7, ch, K-R1; 5. B-Kt6, ch!, K —-Ktl, 6. Q- R7, mate). x‘ A thorough understanding of the typical mating continuations makes the most complicated sacrificial combinations leading No. 260 No. 261 ne ET Aid Owe 77 Ck YY AY & IAS oe eo a win © all ate 5 i o. Gav Ay one | 2 Att ® YoOUMGRE BR GD REA ia aa: a hw up to them not only not difficult but almost a matter of course. Thus in position No. 261: Here White played 1.R x P!. The move is imposing, but really quite a matter of course. But one must seeit. If 1.... Px Kt, there naturally follows 2.QxRP,ch, K-Ktl; 3.Q-R7, mate. If1..., P x R, thenthereisthetypical mate: 2.Q — Kt6, ch, K-RI1; 3.Q-R7, mate. And, if 1....KtxR, then 2. Kt-—B5, ch, wins as follows: If 2....K—B3?, then 3.QxRP, mate. If 2....K-—Rl1, then 3. QP, ch, K —-Ktl, 4, KtxB,ch,QxKt, 5.Q-R7, mate. Finally, if 2.... K —Ktl!, then 3. Kt xP, ch, K—Kt2! (if 3.... K-RI1?*, then 4,Kt-—Kt4, ch, K-Kt2, 5.Q-—R7, mate); 4. Kt — BO, ch, K-~Ktl!; 5.KtxB,ch. If 5....Q or KtxKt, then again 6. Q —R7, mate; if, however, 5.... K—Kt2, then White has won a piece while still retaining a mating attack, which he can continue, for example, by 5. B x P. “3 174 THE MIDDLE GAME One of the most frequent typical attacks is the Bishop sacrifice at KR7. It always comes like a thunderbolt, but, just like the Smothered Mate (see p. 182), it is really the result of a considered plan—see No. 262. White’s King’s Rook’s pawn is twice attacked—by the Bishop and by the Rook, but also twice, and apparently sufficiently, guarded—by the Knight and by the King. But in such positions the Bishop can always be sacrificed at KR7, if the Queen is there to assist. After 1....BxP,ch!; 2. KtxB, No. 262 No. 263 ou hee NN \ SS a7 8S (e7)| |EZ Y SS x. \ pe SSS Ws AN we a. Be ~~ SN WSS X \ per flat X SoGeme Bey > de \\ ~ \ oe ~~ fe i Wy . Y Y g Uv Vy ty, ce Z RASA | lanes Te RQwW TT AAR REY Bigeye ao 2 (aA ES Q-R5 the Knight at White’s KR2 cannot move because of Q—R8, mate. Black therefore wins the Knight, and has gained a pawn. In position No. 263 also, the Bishop sacrifice is decisive. The play was: 1.B-QB5, R-K1; 2.BxP,ch!, KxB; 3.Q-R5,ch, K-Ktl; 4. R-KR3 (threatening Q-R8, mate), P—B3. Now even 5. R-—QI1 would be sufficient to win, for, if 5....B-—Q2 (the Queen must guard the King’s Rook), there follows 6. R(R3) —-Q3 and White wins back the Bishop. Or, even stronger, (instead of 6. R(R3) -—Q3), 6. Q - R7, ch, K —- B2; 7. R-KKt3 (threatening Q x P, mate), P-K4 (if R-KKtl, then Q-—Kt6, mate); 8. Q-—-—kKt6, ch, K -K3!; 9. R-Q6, ch, K-—K2; 10. Rxeither P, mate or Q x KtP,mate. Or8. Q x P, ch, K — K3; 9. R — Q6, ch, K — B4; 10. Q — Kt4, mate. In the actual game White played, instead of 5. R —-Q1 (after which Black would have had to sacrifice his Queen), the even THE MIDDLE GAME 175 stronger move 5. Q — Kt6, with the continuation 5.... B — R3; 6. R-R7, Q-Q2, 7.Q-—R5, after which the threatened R —-R8, mate, could be guarded against only by 7... P—-Kt4 or Kt3, whereupon there would follow 8. R-—R8, ch, K - Kt2; 9. Q —R7, mate. Equally typical, but even more frequent, is the Bishop sacri- fice at KR7 which is followed by Kt —Kt5, ch and Q-RS5. This occurs very often in the French Defence (1. P —K4, P-—K3), e.g. after the moves 1.P—K4, P—K3; 2. P-Q4, P - Q4, 3. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3, 4. B—-Kt5, B- K2, 5. Bx Kt (not good, although success- . ful here), BxB; 6. Kt—B3, vO; 208 Castles; 7. B-—Q3, P—QKt3? mt Ne tae (P —B4 was the right counter Aa Ys i a hae here), 8.P-KR4, B-Kt2? 4 (2 . ee | (B — R3 was much better). Now ZG Y YA Ui jy Vdd 7) wehavethepositionforthetypi: Gy 47#4fGf YZ cal ssarificial attack (No 264): a, y Zi / We tay : : Yate GOW There followed: 9. P — K5, Yi ys R Mi, iB B-K2; 10.BxP,ch, KxB JY BOY ay (if Black does not capture, then 4 iy 4 Wy yo ‘Ye he has lost a pawn); 11. Kt- yea, "47 py Gs, Kt5,ch, K-Kt3. If i... 26 We Ze K — Kt], there naturally follows 12.Q-R5 (threatening Q-R7, mate), BxKt, 13. PB, P-—KB4, 14. P-—Kt6 and then Q-RS8, mate. If, instead, 11.... K —R3, then the King is driven to KKt3 by 12. Q — Q2, threatening to win the Qucen by Kt x KP, ch. Naturally the opening of the King’s Rook’s file by 11.... B x Kt is out of the question, because of 12.PxB,ch, K-—Kt3, 13. Q—-R5, ch, K — B4; 14. R — R3!, Q x P (or anything else); 15. R — B3, mate. In the game the continuation (after 11....K —-Kt3) was Kt — K2, followed by Kt —B4, ch, which was good enough. Stronger and typical is the continuation of the attack by 12.Q-Q3,ch, P-B4 (if K-—R3?, then Q-R7, mate); 13. Px P, e.p., ch! (Kt x KP would be good enough, the text- move, however, better maintains the attack on the King), KxP; 14.Q-B3,ch, K-Kt3; 15. P—R5, ch!, K —-R3! (if 15.... K x Kt?, then 16. Q —Kt3, ch, K—B4; 17. Q —Kt6, ch, K—B5; 18. Kt-—K2, mate); 16. Kt-—B7,ch, RxKt (if 176 THE MIDDLE GAME K ~ R2, White first safeguards his Queen by Q —Q3, ch, and then captures Black’s); 17. Q x R (threatening Q — Kt6, mate), K —R2; 18. P - R6 and now the catastrophe is threatened by either P x P, ch or Q x P, mate. ¥ Position No. 265 shows another example of this extremely frequent sacrificial combination, usually praised by the critics as “‘brilliant’’, ‘inspired’, etc., whereas in truth it results from a well known plan, just as does the mate with Bishop and Knight. Here the play was: 1. B-Q3, Kt(B4) -K2?; 2. BxP, ch!, KxB; 3.Kt-—Kt5,ch, K-—Kt3. If 3....K—Ktl, then naturally 4. Q—-—R5, etc.; if, instead 3.... K —R3, there can, in this case, follow 4.Q-~—Kt4 (threatening Q-R4, ch), Kt-B4; 5.B-Bl, threatening to win the Queen by Kt x KP, ch. The continuation after 3.... K —Kt3 was: 4. Q ~Kt4, P -— B4; 5.Q-Kt3, Q-Bl; 6. R-B3 (after 6. Kt xP, ch, K —B2!; 7. Kt xR White would have a No. 265 Rook and two pawns against Y two minor pieces but his attack “wy would be atanend. Therefore 7 7 he prefers to concentrate still more pieces for the attack, and he can do this all the more easily since Black, in his cramped position, has no strong move at his disposal), P—B5 (in order to free himself a little by his next move); 7.Q-—Kt4, Kt —- B4; 8. R—R3! (again stronger than the immediate Kt x P, ch. That move Black can never prevent. Now the threat is Q —R5, mate), R-—R1; 9. Kt x P, ch, K-B2; 10. Q x Kt, ch, K-K2 (if 10...K-Ktl, then 11.RxR,ch, K xR; 12. Q-R5, ch, K -Ktl; 13. Kt —-Kt5, B —- B4; 14. Q —- B7, ch, K-—RI; 15. P—K6 and White wins easily); 11. Q —Kt5, chi, KxKt; 12.Q-Kt6,ch, K-K2; 13.QxP,ch. If now K —K3, then Q —B6, mate. If, instead, K — QI, then White wins the Rook and still has the attack. * THE MIDDLE GAME 177 In these attacks starting with a sacrifice at KR7 the attacker must beware of overlooking a guard on that point. It not infrequently happens that a player brilliantly sacrifices the Bishop at KR7, but, after Kt —-Kt5, ch, the King’s retreat to Ktl, and Q-R5, a guard on the point KR7 is suddenly possible by Kt -KB3 or B—KB4. This naturally brings the attack to a terrible end. Typical also are Queen or Rook sacrifices at KR7, if the square KKt8 is taken from the King either by a Bishop com- manding the diagonal from QR2 to KKt8, or by a Knight at K7, or by its occupation by his own Rook. Here are first some simple, and afterwards some more complicated examples. No. 266 No. 267 IW SS WE (<=) ee SS pe \N WSS WS WS \der Gl 4 SS WS \ tp WS 7) é, "Oy; SS W WN Ws » WW N Ss NY N por im *s Ny, Ws a ee WN WH CYL, Bey Y) Yy ty, Segal | In position No. 266 the natural play (if only one sees it) is 1.QxP, ch!, KxQ; 2. R—R3, mate. In position No. 267 the complete exposure of Black’s King is brought about by a Knight sacrifice which is also of frequent occurrence: 1. Kt —Kt6, ch, Px Kt; 2. R—B3 and the mate by R-—R8 can only be postponed by two useless sacrifices, viz, B — K6 (in order to interpose at KR3) and R-—K3. Both pieces are captured and the mate follows. Naturally, when considering the sacrifice, one must cal- culate with meticulous accuracy whether a saving move is N 178 THE MIDDLE GAME not perhaps possible for one’s opponent, as in position No. 268. Here, after 1...Q-R2,ch; 2.K-RI1, Black (Anderssen) made the typical Knight sacrifice 2.... Kt —-Kt6, ch, in the certain conviction that his opponent (Louis Paulsen) would resign because he could not guard against R — R3, mate (after 3.PxKt, R—-B3). Paulsen, however, found this brilliant move to parry the threat—4. R — B2!!. If Black captures the No. 268 No. 269 ie o © w| | * © kee Bi wis) |e kt iva @ &| |itian & o 8 @ Gan | joe @ «~ We ar YY y; Wy YY ( Yy i, | | aw Oe “yy” Ye WH tS OE; UY; “g OD ae We BBS GEE Yip yy CEP “Ys G as AR) EE Wid... B a VES] (Ye Yo GY@ Rook, White plays Q xR, ch, and mates next move. Thus the sacrificial combination was refuted and White won. The mating combination in No. 269 shows a variant. 1.Q~xP,ch!, KxQ; 2.R-R8,ch, K-—Ktl; 3. Kt —Kt6 and the mate by 4. R —- R8 can in no way be prevented. Al- though this mating combination is quite typical, yet, in an actual game, it was overlooked by a distinguished master. One has to see the move, even if it is not immediately obvious. In position No. 270 Black himself unmasked the line of the opposing King’s Bishop by l1.... Kt x Kt?. “Naturally” White made ,the Rook sacrifice, 2.R xP, ch, followed by 3.Q-Rl, ch, B-—R3; 4. Q xB, mate. Equally typical is the mating combination when the square next to that occupied by the King is guarded by a Knight. THE MIDDLE GAME 179 In position No. 271 the play is: 1. Kt—K7,ch, K-RI; 2.Q~xP,ch, KxQ; 3. R—RI, mate. ¥ No. 270 No. 271 Jt ih WY &7 g YZ Yi, Wo “i We GY OG Yip RR J li a, Wg / Gr Y Ve YR GY Y; y YY Z YY, Z ‘o Yj EB Position No. 272 shows a more complicated example. Here White had played to win the Queen, and had just attained that end, by B—Kt5, when he was surprised by the typical mating combination 1.... Kt—K7, ch; 2. K—-Rl, R <P, chl, No. 272 No. £273 "Uy tiff GY 4 ya pe ie G4 Y ee EY ZY Ge ANA tm 7 My 87 ag A 1, ch; 4. Q—R6 (if B — R6, then Q — R5, mate), R, Q-—R5 or Q xB, mate. x‘ As I have already remarked, the square KKtl, instead of being threatened by a hostile Bishop or Knight, may be taken away from the King by his own Rook. In such cases a Queen sacrifice at KR7 is alwaysa possibility. Thus in position No. 273, Xx 180 THE MIDDLE GAME which at the same time demonstrates a quite typical and frequent mating combination: 1.P-B5!, KPxP?; 2.QxP, ch!, KxQ; 3. R-—R3,ch, K-Kt2, 4.B-—R6,ch, K—-R2:; 5. B—B8, ch!, B-R5; 6. R~xB, mate. It is easily seen that all these attacks on castled positions, especially those on the point KR7, are possible only when the defender has not a Knight at his KB3, either because it has been driven away by P~-K65 or else because it has been faultily developed or displaced or exchanged. The Kung’s Knight at K B3 1s the best protection for the castled position on the King’s side. Here are some drastic examples. In No. 274 the play is: No. 274 No 275 MaLUey & NOW Mer, ALRiset tas ase 7 ZO Z %Y Y a Bg iE Wp a “a, x Ws, be Vb, UA yk & & 7 M)6/7 / if ALI aY, Y MSTRT Le DB AV Yo a, a AMM BAW RA A 4, Z Z Dp Y 1. Kt -KKt5, Castles; 2.Q-—-R5, P—KR3; 3. Q x Kt, P x Kt, 4,.BxP, Q-—KI1, 5. B-—B6 and the Queen mates at Kt7. N \ SS We \ SN SS SS SSS S WA x After the moves 1. P—K4, P- K4, 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3, 3. B - B4, B- B4; 4. Castles, KKt -K2? (Kt — B3 is correct), 5. Kt —-Kt5, Castles?; 6. Q—R5, P—KR3 position No. 275 1s reached. Here White forces a typical mate, unless Black sacrifices the Exchange at his KB2: 7. Kt xP, Q-K1?, 8. KtxRP, ch!, K—Rl or R2, 9. Kt —B7, ch!, K-Ktl, 10. Q-—R8, mate. A Knight posted at KB1 is a good guard for the point KR2, although not as good as one at KB3. THE MIDDLE GAME 18] Two BISHOPS AGAINST A CASTLED Posrrion This formation is exceptionally effective. It may permit of a typical Queen sacrifice at KB6. In position No. 276 the play is: 1. R-K8! (preparing the typical sacrifice), QxR; 2.QxR!, Q-K2 (if, instead, the Queen sacrifice is accepted, there naturally follows 3. Bx P, mate); 3.QxQ, KtxQ; 4. R-—K1 (P—B6 is also decisive), Kt-—Ktl; 5. R-—K8 and wins. In the actual game, White (Morphy) made the much more elegant move, 3. Q xP, ch!!, and after 3....Q x Q played 4. P — B6, threatening P x Q, mate. Tf 4....Q-—Bl, then 5.P-—B7, ch, Q—-—Kt2?, and now not B x Q, ch, but P —- B8 (Q or R), mate—a very frequently occur- pane ring continuation. Better, how- Yj @ YY y ever, than 5.... Q —Kt2 is LS Gna &, 4d 5,... Kt -K4, whereupon thero z follows 6.PxKt, P—KRé4 (if 6.... B-Q2, then 7. P—K6, ch or PxP,ch, Q-Kt2; 8. P- B8 (Q), ch!, RxQ; 9. RxR, mate); 7. P-K6,ch, K—-R2. Now, by the simple continua- tion 8. P—~K7, QxKP,9. P- B8 (Q), White can come out a piece ahead. He has, how- ever, a stronger line, the drawing-out and the mating of the isolated King: 8.B-—Q3,ch, K-—R3; 9. R-B6, ch, K-Kt4 (or 9... K—-Kt2; 10.R-Kt6,ch, K-M2, 11. R-Kt8, ch, K-—R3, 12. B-—Bl, mate); 10. R—Kt6, ch, K-—B5 (if K-—R5, then B-B6, mate); 11. K - B2 (threat- ening P —Kt3, mate), P—R5; 12. R-Kt4, mate. SomE PossisLE DANGERS OF CASTLING ON THE QUEEN’s SIDE The castled position on the Queen’s side is subject to some dangers to which that on the King’s side is not. In the first place, the Queen’s Rook’s pawn is not guarded by the King and can, in some circumstances, be captured by a Bishop, in spite of the threatened subsequent imprisonment of the latter. 182 THE MIDDLE GAME Thus the play in position No. 277 is 1.BxP for, if Black makes the usual imprisoning move 1l....P—QKt3, there follows 2. B — R6, mate. * A particular danger for a king castled on the Queen’s side No. 277 No. 278 ty Gate J, y, % , ea we xe Y Z z j a ‘7 th mth a Gh Aad t2@ tf a ¢ is the presence of a hostile Bishop at his KB5, as in position No. 278. In such a position the King is frequently exposed to the typical surprise attack 1.QxP, ch, PxQ, 2. B-—R6, mate. x In general, however, the attacks on a castled position are the same for the Queen’s side as for the King’s. No 279 "GY Y, Wy 14 “(fy HY YY 487 i Lt Uy Fg ge & ti Ujir Yr |G Y Ve THE SMOTHERED Ma’ & The Smothered Mate occurs, or is at least threatened, fairly frequently. It is an exception- ally artistic way of mating. The primitive type is shown in position No. 279: 1.Q-B4,ch, K-RI (if Y/ Yi, GU GUMZS8\ K-Bi, then Q-B7, mate): 2. Kt -B7,ch,K —Ktl. 3.Kt ~ R6, ch. The double check is, as always, very dangerous; here is prepared the wonderfully beautiful conclusion: 3... SS \ SS ZY Y \S “ \ Ze \\ \ \ \ \ \\ . THE MIDDLE GAME 183 K—RI1,; 4. Q—Kt8, ch!!, Rx Q; 5. Kt-B7, mate. The King is completely shut in by his own men, so that the mating move indeed smothers him. Here are some cases which are more complicated: In position No. 280 the play was: 1. Kt — K6, ch, K — Q2 (inorder not to lose a Rook for nothing by 1.... K ~ B1, or the Queen by 1.... K—K2; 2. Kt — B4, ch, Q—K5; 3. Q -Q3); 2. Kt x B, ch, K - Bl (if 2.... K-Q1, White immediately wins the Exchange by 3. Kt—K6, ch, K-Q2; 4. KtxR, ch); 3. Q-K6, ch, No. 280 No. 281 1c oe oo | ol we ty = ty Yue Cg te, & WU = UG ee 41g © 8 idiawms a ee Ua uy Day buy, Wa, Lo - p Z tty, YY Be Z K — Ktl (if K — QI, then Kt x P, mate); 4. Kt — Q7, ch, K - Bl (Kt x Kt loses the Queen); 5. Kt x Kt, ch (stronger than win- ning the Queen by Kt x R, ch), K — Ktl (if K — Q1, then Q — Q7, mate); 6. Kt—Q7,ch, K-Bl; 7. Kt—Kt6,ch, K-Kt]l; 8. Q -—B8, ch, RxQ; 9. Kt — Q7, mate. * In position No. 281 White naturally could continue his attack with R-—K7,ch and RxP,ch. However, he played 1.KtxP, ch, with the continuation 1.... K—Ktl; 2.Q- Kt3, ch, K-R1; 3. Kt-—B7,ch (if Black now takes the Knight, he is helpless after QxR and R-K7), K—-Ktl; 4. Kt —-R6, ch, K-Rl (now Q-— Kt8, ch, would be a terrible mistake since not the Rook but the Knight would capture, so that White’s Knight would not be able to mate at B7); 5.R-—K8 (now, if R or KtxR, the smothered mate by Q — Kt8, ch, etc. can be effected. If, instead, 5.... P x Kt, then 6.R xR, ch, K-—Kt2; 7.Q-B7, mate, or 6.... Kt-—Ktl; 184 THE MIDDLE GAME 7.Q or RxKt, mate), P-KKt3; 7.Q -B7 (stronger than capturing the Rook), Rx R; 7. Q x Kt, mate. - In position No. 282 White exploited very prettily the un- favourable position of Black’s Knight at KR4 by playing 1. B-R7, ch, K-R1; 2. B-Kt6!. (If the Bishop is taken, then 2. Kt x P, ch wins the Queen). After 2.... Kt — B3, there followed 3. B x P!, again with the threat of winning the Queen, No. 282 No. 283 one Aen] |e eave (Lem e | |e me mi tit ai “oe & ae oe “ fh me gee = Te a n i Et He “a Ee ‘a and after 3.... Q — Q3 White forced a splendid smothered mate: 4, Kt —-Kt6, ch, K - R2; 5. Kt x R, ch, K—R1; 6. Q-R7, ch!, Kt xQ; 7. Kt — Kt6, mate. \ : oe” THe Mate on THE Back Rank: INSUFFICIENT GUARD OF THE BASE The exceptionally frequent Mate on the Back Rank is as brutal as the Smothered Mate is artistic. It is rendered possible by an insufficient guard of that rank, and produces a kind of smothering. But the ways and means by which it is prepared are often exceptionally fine and charming. The prettiest combinations frequently culminate in a mate on the back rank. The type is exceptionally simple (No. 283): 1. R—Q8, mate. Or, as in position No. 284: —Q8, ch, R xR; 2. RxR, mate. 185 Px Pp?: . RxR THE MIDDLE GAME > bf Qor R-KI; 4.Q«Q or RB re- 3 QB4! if 2 s Queen and Rook are attacked: i > 285 the play was: 1. P- In position No. Black’ there follows 3. Q — Q8, ch, 2,.RxP!. a No. 285 4 fu Lf WA No. 284 yy ‘Lh, Co, de “, spectively, R or Q respectively x Q; 5. R x R or Q respectively, - ch, R-—B1; 6.R xR, mate. But it has to be seen! 3. Q x Kt!, 2.B R xR, ch (the best move is B —- Q2, but then White has won Kt x B; bd x Kt Q1); 8 5 In position No. 286 the way to victory is even less obvious: 1. KR —-Q1, Q—K3 (now White simply removes the guard on the Rook at Black No 287 ai a piece); 4.R xR, Q or PxQ; 5.R xR, ch, Q-K1; 6. Rx Q, \ ee \ hee Y Q -KB4, then 2.BxKt, KtxB; 3.RxR, ch sad No 286 1S ae ae 7, mate. 186 THE MIDDLE GAME (now this is stronger than the Queen sacrifice by Q x Kt), Kt xR; 4. Q-K8, mate. The beginner must not imagine that, in position No. 287, he can force a mate by 1. R-—Q8, ch. Black is not forced to capture the Rook—that would be a terrible blunder—but plays 1.... R-—K1! and all is guarded—a simple but very pretty con- tinuation, with which you must make yourself thoroughly acquainted, since it occurs times without number. *% Now some finer examples: In position No. 288 Black wins at once by 1....QxP!. If the No. 288 No. 289 en eee re “s Gi 4 TEN be 4 SS % 4, WY Yi Y; aaa 2 rise WW 4 WE WN Y “MwHse si Queen is taken, there follows 2....R —Q8, ch; 3. RxR, RxR, mate. But White’s Queen and Queen’s Rook are attacked. If the Rook guards the Queen by 2. R-K1, Black exchanges Queens, and, if the Rook recaptures, mates by 3.... R — Q8, ch, etc. If, instead, the Queen guards the Rook by 2. Q-K1 or Bl, then Black captures the Rook and again mates by 3.... R — Q8, ch, etc. (a . gE * In position No. 289 the win is quite problem-like. The play was: 1... K-—Rl?; 2.BxR, PxB; 3.R-QI, Q-B2; 4.B-—R5!, QxB (if Q -K2, then R- Q8, ch, and the Queen aie be given up for the Rook); 5. Q-—-—Kt4!! and Black’s Queen is lost for, if 5....QxQ, then 6. R-Q8, ch, Q-BI; 7. Rx Q, mate; while, if Base Q - B2, then 6.Q _B8, mate. THE MIDDLE GAME 187 If, at his third move, Black plays 3....Q-—K2 (instead of Q -—B2), there follows 4.Q-—Kt4, P—B4; 5.QxP, Q-KI (naturally Black cannot accept the offered sacrifice of the Queen because of the threatened mate by R —Q8, ch, etc.); 6. Q — Q4! (not Q — K5, for then Black would guard against the threatened mate at his KKt2 by playing R-—R2), P-K4; 7.QxP, Q-Bl1 or Ktl, 8.Q xP, ch',QxQ, 9 R-—Q8, mate These manceuvres are indeed charming! In position No. 290 White, by playing 1 B —R6!, threatens Q xP, mate. The Bishop cannot be captured because after 1....Q xB? White wins at least the Exchange by 2.Q~x RI, No. 290 No 291 Yj, We ok ty 4G, & Ae 3 4 Y, a oat ft oe oY say & fe wo WU, few W Oh & As 4 Ga GY gt yy Ay, a Wy a WR a: (Boo Big Ey: J Bh B® RY, aa Vi, BW, Wi WE & je Gi YW for, if Black takes the Queen, then White mates. 3. R x R, ch, B-Kl1, 4. R xB, mate. In position No. 291 a combmation by Black is rendered unsound by a mate threatened on his back rank: The play was: 1...KtxP?, 2.PxKt, R-K8,ch. Black had expected 3.QxR? However, there followed 3.B-B1! and, if Black took the Queen, then White would have mated by R — B8. Position No. 292 ulustrates a frequently occurring mistake: The play was: 1.... Kt -K4 (Black should first have made an outlet for his King by playing P-KR3), 2. Bx B!, R x R? (by 188 THE MIDDLE GAME 2.... P — B3!, followed by 3....QxB or, if 3. B-Q5, ch, by 3.... R x B, Black could have corrected his mistake); 3. R x R, QB; 4. Q x Kt and the Rook could not recapture because of Y ane the mate by R — Q8, ch, etc. Yay GG EN Wy No. 292 G Wd ‘gaz yy Y Here are some rather more yy y7 Yj ‘ complicated cases of the mate a8 ee on the back rank: 7 a Wp U, Ya In position No. 293 the play Y vA re was: 1. Kt — Q5 (cutting off the Y) y Y ZY eet of ae Queen on Black’s y 2. Black should now have V/ “OE ic ne sacrificed his Queen for the Rook), Ktx Kt; 2.Q xP, ch, K-QI1; 3. P- Q3, Q- B3; 4. B — Kt5, ch, B - K2 (if Kt — K2, mate at Black’s KB] still follows); 5.Q-B8,ch, RxQ; 6.R xR, mate. * In position No. 294 the play was: 1. Q-Kt4, ch, Q -K2?; 2. R -Q8,ch, RxR; 3.RxR, mate. Better would have catGem x _- oxi CA ae ts 2 ee 28 ee | o ae i ee a oe a mL ES 2g mw aes © © Bae © Blin & been 1....K—K1, with the continuation 2. B — Kt5, ch, P-B3; 3.BxP,ch, QxB (if PxB, then Q~xR, ch); 4.RxP, ch, Q-K3; 5. Q - Q6 (stronger than the immediate capture of the Queen) and Black is lost. THE MIDDLE GAME 189 You must be on your guard against the following, not in- frequent, surprise attack (No. 295): The play was: 1. QR -Q1, Q-B3; 2.QxP,QxP; 3. R-Q7, QR-B1; 4.QxP? (the Queen could have gone to KKt3 to guard White’s K B2; still stronger would have been the counter- attack by 4. R—-—B7!, whereupon the Queen could not have No. 295 No. 296 Us Koen lilt Serer a ia fore fe woe | le be been taken because of 5.R xR, mate), QxP, ch!; 5.RxQ, R-B8, ch; 6. R-—B1l, either R x R, mate. ¥ In position No. 296 the play was: 1.... R-B4; 2. Q-Q7, No. 297 R(B4) x P?; 3. Q x R, ch!, RxQ; 4.RxR,ch, B-Bl; va Zz = = 5.RxB,ch, K xR; 6. R-Q8, oN. mate. Black had not seen that oA ae wn wi after the capture of the King’s Z yyy fA +7 Uh Uy Z yy pawn the Rook at his K1 was oA Uy Y/ Je doubly attacked, by the Queen yy Yew Y and also over the Rook at his K4 by the Rook. A very pretty 2" yy [oa Uh i combination. a z Y Yj = a5 i AL PERPETUAL CHECK EN YW) In the following I give some of the most common examples. In position No. 297 the play was: 1. P—QB4,BxP, ch; 2.K xB and the Queen gave per- petual check at KKt5 and KB6. <S 3 be HE cS — yy “a 190 THE MIDDLE GAME In position No. 298 White can win two pieces for a Rook by 1.R x Kt, ch, QxR; 2. Q x B but then Black’s Queen can give perpetual check at K8 and KR5. * In position No. 299 Black captures the Knight, whereupon White’s Queen gives perpetual check, wz. 2. Q-—-B5, ch, No. 298 No. 299 avatar a as a. oh eee: te a4 eB e 5 Ca o VATA, y % 4 ; _ “Baw a me ie oe age ates K —-RI or Ktl; 3. Q- B8, ch, K—R2; 4. Q -B5, ch, P — Kt3; 5.Qx BP, ch, K-Rl1; 6. Q — B8, ch, etc. *¥ THE Rook ON THE OPEN FILE AND ON THE SEVENTH RANK The command of an open file by a Rook, or by both Rooks, represents a great advantage, particularly if the file is the only one open, and the opponent cannot reply by occupying it with a Rook. Naturally, when in possession of an open file, one attempts, by bringing another major piece on to that file, to prevent the opposition of an enemy Rook. If both sides occupy the same open file, then neither should exchange Rooks but should leave the exchange to the opponent so that the recapturing Rook (or Queen) commands the open file. The result of the fight for an open file often decides the issue of the game. The chief advantage of the possession of an open file is that the Rook may be able to penetrate to the seventh rank. The penetration of the Rook to that rank is a tremendous advantage in either the Middle or the End-Game. Not only THE MIDDLE GAME 191 does the Rook attack the pawns to right and left but, above all, it threatens the King. If some assistance can be given to the Rook—frequently only a single minor piece is necessary— then at once a mate is threatened. Therefore the defender must endeavour to oppose—and as soon as possible—a Rook on the rank to which the enemy one has penetrated. Here is a typical example (No. 300): The play was: 1.QR-Bl1, R-QBI1; 2.Kt—R5, B-RI; 3. R x R (here White exchanges Rooks in order to take imme- diate possession of the open file with the other Rook), Q x RB; 4.R—B1, Q-QKtl; 5. Q - QB2! (by this move White prevents the opposition of Black’s Rook and now has complete command of the open file. He already : threatens to penetrate to the eee seventh rank—and this in the Yu Se YY tw long run Black cannot pre- Ly Ad “re J x vent), B-Q1; 6. Kt(R5) - B6, A Q —Kt2; 7. Kt x B,ch, Rx Kt; j 8. Q —- B7 (now White has com- mand of the game. Admittedly, there is not a single pawn on the seventh rank—an exceptional ZY case!—but the pressure exerted Yy Yj from his QBT by the Queen , Ua . TE and later by the Rook is abso- de Ui a lutely crippling), Q — Ktl (Black avoids the exchange as a Rook on the seventh rank is even more unpleasant than a Queen); 9. B — B2 (now White brings into play his one badly placed piece. One should always strive to attain the co-operation of all the pieces and, to that end, attempt to improve the position of any that are out of action or badly posted), Q —Kt3 (in order to reply to B-R4 with Q x Kt, ch); 10. Kt — B3, Q x Q (forced by the threat of B — R4); 11. RxQ (now mating attacks begin at once), K-—K1 (the Knight needs protection); 12. B~R4 (12. Kt -Kt5, Kt — BI; 13. B — B5 was good enough), R -Ktl; 13. Kt —-Kt5, Kt - Bl; 14. Kt —- B7 (threatening mate by either Kt —- Q6 or R - K7), Kt — Q2; 15. Kt — Q6, ch, and White wins the Knight. DY WN \ SS = %, SSO f WSS BUSS SAL YG SS SSG a1 NW Ws SS \ ber ot mio \S WS bey ~ ay SS YoRNY S\N ie WSs vt Vis = ~ ~ SS \ In position No. 301 White played 1. R-R7, threatening mate at once (2. R-B7, ch, 3.Q-Ré4, ch, 4.QxP,ch and 2.Q-—Kt4 Kt — K2; P-Kt4; sacrifice: Bx P, ch), *% Black by 1....R-—B7 pro- THE MIDDLE GAME Bishop There followed: 1l.... Similarly in position No. 302 duced a mating threat, viz. the Queen sacrifice Q xP, ch, 3. R-B7, ch, K—-K1; 4.QxP, ch, P—B3; 5.Q-—Kt7 and Black could not prevent mate at his Q2 or K2. 5. Q — Q7, mate). (threatening the 192 \\ AN We SSF 82 ee PéSaGi ines ees ee ee QPL BNI Bee OM SS CA ca =. Bag peg esea” a et ee ce =| Me Gi) gSof | Beebe ga hag 5 5 ae a aecs * 4278 a ibs sag nam a s ales gia grees a 284 cal Ms 2 | Ree abe 3 ee! SOS esl (eg se a thee “Mec a Ram Aa KS TS Ww SG = : of 8 Sa Cc -— = To oa La 7 aoe = |e \ __ - “5 [a_i ao s se S| Medel Ge) 32) S| i ew mee Al «1s waa gts Z a “. a #28 “ Moe 3 aM ae \ @ ats Us. oe Ser IW WN _! RN Shs mie |} 22 i Ee ies: THE MIDDLE GAME 193 pawns. If 3. R-—RI1, Black can still exchange Queens—by Q - B5, ch); 3.Q x P?, R x KtP (again threatening mate—by a Rook sacrifice at Kits, followed by R — Ktl, ch and Q — Kt7, mate); 4. Q —-QB3, R(Q1) — Ktl (threatening R — Kt8, mate); 5. Q -Q3, Q-R3, ch and White resigned since, if 6. Q —K3, then 6....Q—B3, ch and mate next move; if 6. R —K3, then 6.... R(Kt7) -Kt6 (simplest); 7. Q—-—B4,ch, K—-—RI1 and the Rook is lost; or, if 6. R—Q2, then 6....RxR; 7.QxR, R — Kt8, ch!, 8. K — B2, R — Kt7, ch, winning the Queen. ¥ In pon No. 304 Black first of all occupied the only open file by 1....R-—QBl. White could not oppose a Rook on that file without losing an import- ant pawn by the exchange of Rooks followed by QxP. He played 2.Q — Kt6, attacking the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. Black did not worry about it and played for attack by 2.... R -B7! After 3. Qx RP Black attacked the King’s Bishop’s pawn a third time—by 3.... a Q-B3. (If White guarded it by the ugly move 4.Q-KI], Ay YY Black would make two captures a 7 a Ei ‘e at KB7 with a Rook in order, after that, to win the Queen’s Rook and Queen’s Rook’s pawn and so come out a pawn ahead). White, therefore, played 4.Q —R8, ch and after 4.... K —B2 took the Queen’s Knight’s pawn with check, thus driving the King to Kt3, and then safe- guarded the King’s Bishop’s pawn by playing it to B4. But then Black by 6.... Q — Kt7 transferred the attack to the points KKt2 and KR2 which were difficult to guard. White found a fine parry by 7. K~R1, Rx KtP; 8. R-KKtl and thought that this pinning of the Rook had saved him. But Black made a still finer and problem-like counter-move, 8.... R(B4) — Kta!!, by which he released the other Rook from the pin and so forced mate. (If P xR, then R xP, mate; or, if R xR, then Q xR, mate). Really wonderful combinations, resulting from the penetration of the Rook to the seventh rank. White could defend himself better by playing 3. QR — Bl but ae 194 THE MIDDLE GAME then there follows 3.... R(B4) x P!, after which White’s best move is to capture the Rook at his QB2 for, if, instead, 4,.R x R(KB2), then Black after 4....R xR, ch comes out a pawn ahead. After 4.RxR(QB2)!, RxR; 5.QxRP (threatening mate by Q-R8, ch, etc.), P-—R3 White has certainly restored the equality of material but is still threatened by the strong position of Black’s Rook. The threat is Q — Kt4, attacking the King’s Knight’s and King’s pawns. Therefore White opposes his Rook by 6. R — B2 but after 6.... R — B8, ch; 7. R-B1, Q-B4! (in order to reply to Rx R with Q xP, ch and QxR, ch, thus obtaining two united passed pawns); 8. Q — Q2, R — B6! (stronger than winning a pawn by R xR, ch followed by Qx RP); 9. Q—Q4 Black secures a winning end- game by 9....QxQ; 10.PxQ, R~xP for either the Queen’s pawn or the Queen’s Knight’s is lost. (If 11. R-—Ktl, then 11.... R-—R5; 12. R-Q1, R —-Ktd). Here are some examples from the transition from the Middle to the End-Game and from the End-Game itself. In position No. 305 the play was 1.Q-B6, QxQ (this ex- change is practically forced otherwise White strengthens his attack by R -K7); 2. Kt xQ, ch, K~R1; 3. R-K7 (by this move White wins a pawn for, if QR — Ktl, then Kt — Q7 wins 4 EN 0G Y/ the Exchange; if KR —-QKtl, yy Z SAL $ Z ° ’ Uy, Y, yy, yg, then P—KRé4 and the King’s 2G z V/, Y/, z to z Bishop’s pawn is lost; while, if ZitZ ZaxZ © -Kt3, then R -B7and White Y tty ZY ys must give up either tlre Queen’s e. aa im a Rook’s pawn, the Queen’s V//, eG kA Bishop’s or the King’s Bishop’s), W777 = Kt(Kt4) —K3; 4.R x KtP,QR- 8B YER AS Ktl (if 4....KR-QKtl, then Ay yey yee" = White wins by 5. Rx BP, 7 7 AY ie R x P?; 6. R(K1) x Kt, Kt x R?; 7.RxP, mate. Here we see how the so strongly posted Rook threatens not only the pawns but also the King); 5. R x RP (a piece so well placed should not be exchanged unless some very good reason dictates it), R x P (now Black’s Rook also has broken in but in White’s camp everything is guarded); 6. Kt-Q7, R- Bl; 7. Kt-—K5 THE MIDDLE GAME 195 (winning a second pawn for, if 7....P—B3, then 8. KtxP, R x Kt?; 9. R-R8, ch, winning both Knights), R(Kt7) — Ktl; 8. Kt x BP, ch, K—Ktl; 9. Kt — R6, ch (just a little trap. If 9... K-Bl?, then 10. R-B7, ch followed by 11. R(B7) x Kt wins both Knights), K-Rl; 10.Kt-—B7,ch, K-Ktl; 11. Kt -K5 (with the intention of continuing the attack by Kt -—-Q7 and Kt-—B6,ch), R-Rl; 12.RxR (now White cannot very well avoid the exchange; besides by it he wins a third pawn), RxR; 13. KtxBP, RxP; 14. Kt-K7, ch, K—-Bl; 15. Kt x P and White won. In position No. 306 the move 1.... Q — R3!, which looks bad since it results (after 2. Q x Q) in doubled and isolated pawns, actually is decisive. By it Black secures the entry of his No. 306 Rook at QB7 for 2.K—-—K2 UY e ia, a. Yi Y cannot be played on account of = gy"4"'y yey, the loss of the Bishop after % Was % Z& Z Z R — B7, ch. Also the opening of UY) Y $ Wy Y the Queen’s Knight’s file allows 4y , a frontal attack on White’s ‘ ‘yppey yy yy, backward Queen’s Knight’s ey Vs 7 pawn. A backward pawn in a jile which 18s open tothe opponentis a grave disadvantage and 18 gener- ‘yyy me yy! ally as good as lost. 2.QxQ, YZ P x Q (if now White opposes his Rook at QB1, Black exchanges and then occupies either the Queen’s Bishop’s file or the Queen’s Knight’s with his other Rook. If, instead, White prevents R-B7 by 3. Kt-K1], then 3....R —QKtl wins a pawn for, if 4.B-B3, then 4...RxP; 5.BxP, KtxP); 3. K—Kt2, R-B7; 4. B-Bl, R-QKtl; 5.R-QKtl, R-B6; 6.B-Q2, R(B6) xP; 7,.RxR, RxR; 8.BxP (now Black can win the Queen’s Rook’s pawn by playing R-R6 but then White’s Rook occupies one of the open files and in its tyrn penetrates very effectively to the seventh rank. This Black must prevent), R-Kt7! (if now R-QBI, then Black closes the Queen’s Bishop’s file and at the same time gains a tempo by Kt — K6, ch followed by Kt-—B5); 9. B—Q2 (now 9.... Kt x QP, with the intention of replying to 10. Kt x Kt with 10....R xB, would 196 THE MIDDLE GAME be a grave mistake, for White in reply would attack two pieces by 10. B — B3 and so win at least the Exchange: 10.... Kt x Kt; 11.BxR), B—Kt5 (here, again, Black could win by a pawn —by R-R7—but White would obtain some counter-chances by R-QKtl); 10. B —- B4, R —- R7 and Black wins the Queen’s Rook’s pawn without any danger as White’s Rook cannot break in along either the Queen’s Bishop’s file or the Queen’s Knight’s. * In this example (No. 307), after 1...R-—K1; 2. Kt -Kt6 the penetration of Black’s Rook to the seventh rank was so effective that he could sacrifice the Exchange. There followed: 2... R-K7; 3. R—Q8 (threat- ening R-R8, mate), Rx Kt; 4,.PxR, ch, KxP and now on the one side White’s pawns were threatened, on the other his King, the latter by the advance of Black’s King to KR6, threatening R x P, mate. If White guards the pawns by R-Bl—in itself no worthy function for the great strength of a Rook—then Black does not attack it by B -K6?—for the reply R — K8! would produce a horrible pin—but, instead, the Black King starts on its journey. White, therefore, decided on the counter-attack 5. R-Q7, Rx P; 6. R(B1) —- B7, that certainly seemed quite strong enough. Generally two Rooks on the seventh rank have a completely devastating effect. Here, however, the attack on Black’s KKt2 was completely parried by the pretty move 6.... B— Q5! (the Bishop could not be taken for the Rook at B7 would have been en prise). After the continuation 7. R x P, RxP; 8. RxP, RxP Black had the slight advantage in material of a Bishop and two passed pawns to a Rook. How- ever, bad play by White, who drove Black’s King to the attack, led to the completion of the mating attack. There followed: 9.P—-R4, P-QR4; 10.P-R5,ch (R-B5 was better), K —Kt4; 11. Rx P, ch (hoping to satisfy his opponent with this offer of material; Black, however, will have none of THE MIDDLE GAME 197 it but plays for a mate), K—R5; 12. R(KKt7) -K7, P—RS5 (depriving the Rook at QKt7 of the square QKt3, where it could drive back the advancing King. Now K -R6 or Kt6 followed by R-R7, mate cannot be prevented). White resigned. The following example (No. 308) is very similar: Here Black parted with one of his Bishops for a Knight by 1.... Bx Kt so that after 2.R xB, P—KKt4; 3. B-Kt3 he could penetrate to the seventh rank with his Rook. (3. B-—K3, BxB; 4.R xB, R —-Q7; 5. R -QB3 would have been a better defence.) There followed 3.... R-Q7; 4.R-QBI (it would ——— No. 308 by 4 Sey = Se elo GH have rite peeter to defend the Wy A (al ale Y pawn by QB4—the defend- ywy"’ yay” vn" wy ing Rook would have had more Ui & Z a Yi, 2 Ry scope than at QB1 where itis § Y Z yy Yy Z Y far too passive). Nowby 4... GZ ~Y@R YG P — B4, threatening to win the a Fe bg y Bishop by P-B5, Black foreed Ze, Wa Ui open the King’s Bishop’s file. Wy YY Y Vy There followed: 5. P xP, e.p., g TK 8 WY}, psy g Z Yay, Y Gp WA R(B1l)xP (now one of the gu vy two Bishop’s pawns is lost); 4 6. P—-KR4, Bx P,ch; 7. Bx B, R(B3) x B and further loss was unavoidable. The play was: 8. Px P?, R xP, ch; 9. K-Bl? (K —R1 was better. Now the King is mated), PxP; 10. R-K7, P-Kt5d; 11. RxP%, P — Kt6 and the threat of R(Q7) — B7, ch followed by R — Kt8, mate could not be parried. In position No. 309 the play was 1.RxR, KtxR (the Rook could not recapture as White, after playing R x R, ch, would immediately have won the Queen’s pawn by either Kt — Kt3 or Kt — B3); 2. R-K7, completely crippling Black’s game. There followed: 2....P—-QR3; 3. Kt —-Kt3, P —-QKt3 (Black could not guard the Queen’s pawn without incurring disadvantage elsewhere); 4.KtxP, RxKt; 5.R~xKt, ch, K —B2; 6. R —-K3 and White won with his extra pawn. (If, instead, 6.R—K7,ch, K-B3; 7.RxP, RxP; 8. RxP, 198 THE MIDDLE GAME then 8.... R-Q8,ch; 9.K-B2, R-Q7,ch followed by RxQKtP and Black would still have had some counter- chances). In position No. 310 White had first to fight hard to force his Rook to the seventh rank. The play was: 1. B—-BS5I, BxB,ch (if K-B1, then Kt-—Q6 and both the Queen’s Knight’s pawn and the King’s Bishop’s are attacked); 2. Kt x B, P-QKt3; 3. Kt—Kt7. If now 3.... R(Q1) —Ktl?, then after 4,R -Q7!, R x Kt; 5, R(B1) x P, R—-QB1 White wins first the No. 309 No. 310 *¢ a 2 xh © Bee : xia wie CG; Ui, Ma, a . Y uk J 5 Via A J Fi, J “a SS: a “a King’s side pawns and then (by P — K6) at least the Exchange z.€. 6. Rx P, ch, K-Bl; 7. Rx P (threatening R —- R8, mate), K—-Ktl; 8. R(Q7)—-Kt7,ch, K-Bl; 9.P-K6 and the Knight is forced to take the pawn, for otherwise there follows 10. P —K7, ch, K—K1; 11. R—R8 or Kt8, ch, K — Q2 and the pawn queens with double check. Actually Black played 3....R xR, abandoning the open file to his opponent. After 4.R xR, K-B1 (if R-Ktl, then the Rook still goes to Q7, for RxKt cannot be played on account of mate); 5. R —-Q7 White had secured the dominat- ing position for his Rook. The further play was: 5.... Kt — Q4; 6. Kt —-Q6, Kt —- K2 after which Black was soon in Zugzwang, his pieces being fixed and his pawn moves soon exhausted. There followed: 7. K—B2, P—QR4; 8. P—QR4, R-Ktl; 9. P-B4, P—-Kt3; 10. K-B3, P-R3; 11. P—R4, P-QB4; 12. Kt-—K4, P-KKt4; 13.P-R5, R-Rl; 14. R-Kt7, R-R3; 15. P-Kt3, R-R1; 16. R x P and White won easily. THE MIDDLE GAME 199 But in the critical position in the struggle for the open file Black had at his disposal a much stronger move, viz. 3.... R-Q4. Admittedly, White could then have captured the open file by playing 4. P —- B4 but thus would have had to sacrifice his best pawn. Nevertheless, after 4...RxP; 5. R-—Q7, Kt —K3; 6. R(B1) x P he would have got such a strong pres- sure on his opponent’s position—both Rooks on the seventh rank—that he would have had by far the superior game. THE Errect BEYOND AN ENEMY MAN oF PIECES THAT MOVE IN SrrRaIGutT LINES This is a peculiar phenomenon with which you must make yourself thoroughly familiar. In some circumstances, a piece that moves in a straight line may have an attacking or defens- ive effect beyond a hostile man in its path. Position No. 311 will make this phenomenon clear. In this position Black’s Rook has an effect beyond White’s Rook on the Bishop, so that the latter is really doubly attacked No. 31] No. 312 —by Queen and Rook—and Black can make two captures at his K8. Thus 1....QxB,ch!; 2.RxQ, RxR, mate is possible. In position No. 312, between White’s Rook at K1 and Black’s at his K1, there is, in addition to White’s Rook at K2, Black’s Knight. Once this moves, White’s Rook at K1 200 THE MIDDLE GAME is doubly attacked, and Black can make two captures at his K8. However, in the above position it is not Black to play but White. He sees no reason why he should not capture the Knight which is three times attacked and only twice defended, so he plays 1.RxKt. But now there is produced the state of affairs mentioned above as conditional on the removal of the Knight. White’s Rook at K1 is doubly attacked, and Black can make two captures at his K8. The play is, there- fore: 1....Q xR, ch!; 2.R xQ,R xR, ch; 3.Q-Ktl, R x Q, ch and Black has won the Exchange. x Position No. 313 shows a similar case. The play was: 1....R-—B4; 2.Q-Q7, R(B4)xP?. Now Black’s Rook at K1 is doubly attacked and 3.Q~xR, ch!, gad No. 314 re Ir ot wy “5 = ae “| one : z ata Vi mae _— a ." Ga 7 ‘= ‘e He ewes i Wal & RxQ; 4.R xR, ch leads to mate for 4....B-—B1 permits the sacrificial combination 5. R xB, ch!, K xR; 6. R-Q8, mate. But all this has to be seen! SNE 7 NS oe aes mes H @fn Ue The case is quite similar for the diagonally-moving pieces, Queen and Bishop. Thus in position No. 314: Black’s Q1 is doubly-guarded—by the Rook and, beyond the enemy pawn, by the Bishop. If White plays his Rook to Q8, Black captures there twice and so wins the pawn. THE MIDDLE GAME 201 Similarly in the following example (No. 315): If Black, after 1.RxR, recaptures with the Queen, his Queen’s pawn is attacked not only by the Knight but also, beyond his Queen, by White’s Queen. It can therefore be captured. ek THE PassED Pawn The passed pawn is always a force, not onlyin the End-Game but even as early as the Middle Game, especially when it is fairly far advanced. If possible, therefore, the op- ponent must block it and, if he can, with the least valuable piece, the Knight. Thus in the following example (No. 316): The play was: 1.QR-QIl, QR-Bl1; 2.P-B4, Kt—Kt2!; 3. R-K3, Kt —Q3! (a classic position for the Knight. It blocks the passed pawn, attacks the backward one and guards the advancing one); 4.R(Q1)-K1, P-K5; 5. Kt-Q2, B-Q5 with a great advan- No. 316 an ope A on tage in position for Black. White’s passed pawn will not threaten any danger for some appreciable time. Jé is better, therefore, to have a mobile ma- jority of pawns on a flank than a blocked passed pawn in the centre, a very important prin- ciple laid down by the author. * A far-advanced passed pawn can throw the enemy game into disorder. If it has got as far as the sixth rank, it is so strong, that in conjunction with two pieces, especially if one of them is a Rook, it is more powerful than a Queen—a very important principle enunciated by Steinitz. Two united passed pawns occur rarely in the Middle but 202 THE MIDDLE GAME frequently in the End-Game. In either of these phases of the game they are generally irresistible. In position No. 317 White has the “notorious” isolated Queen’s pawn whose not infrequent fate is to become a Queen, or at least to win the game! In the following we have a pretty example of this. The play was: 1. P—KkKt4, B—-Kt2 (after this the establishment of a passed Queen’s pawn by White is almost forced); 2. P—Kt5, Q-Q3; 3. Bx B, RxB; 4.Q-B3 (if now Black plays R — Ktl, then Kt — B6 wins the Exchange), P-QB4; 5. Kt — B4, Q- B2; 6. P — Q5 (threatening a fork by P—Q6. Here and in the follow- No. 317 a ing play we see how the passed pawn throws Black’s game into disorder), Q-Q2; 7. P-Q6, R-K1; 8.P-—B5 (now Black cannot play Kt — K4, for White exchanges Knights, then sacri- A 7 ‘war B aw a fices his Queen for the Rook, and = — Uy after P —- Q7 makes a new Queen unless Black gives up his in return. Here we see a pretty example of the permanent and terrible danger which a passed pawn represents), Kt — Bl; 9. Q — Q5 (in order to facilitate the further advance of the pawn by playing Kt-—K5), R(Kt2)-—Ktl; 10. Kt-—K5, Q-Kt2; 11. P-Q7. The passed pawn now has a two-fold effect: on the one hand it attacks the Rook and threatens to become a new Queen if Black should play QxQ (ze. 11.... QxQ; 12.PxR (Q), QxR?; 13. Q xP, ch), and on the other it shuts off Black’s Queen from guarding the King’s side, which is now soon stormed. Black’s best move now would have been the sacrifice of the Knight for the pawn, which, of course, would have been equivalent to resigning. The further play was 11.... R(K1) -Q1; 12. Q xP, ch, K - Rl; 13. P —- B6 (the attack on the King, isolated by the isolated pawn, is now stronger than troubling further about the passed pawn by Q — K7and Kt — B7,ch), P x P; 14.Q x BP, ch, K — Ktl; 15. Kt — B7 and White forces mate by either Kt — R6 or Q — R8. THE MIDDLE GAME 203 In position No. 318 the advancing passed pawn throws the enemy game into disorder in similar fashion. The play was: 1.B—-K4, QR-Kl1; 2.P-Q5, B-Q2; 3. P-Q6, B —-K3 (to prevent B —Q5, ch); 4. P—Q7, R-QI; 5. R — Q6, Q — B2 (it would have been better to play the Queen to R4 or Ktl. At B2 she is exposed to a masked attack from White’s Queen); 6. B —Q5! and wins, for, if 6....BxB, then White wins the Queen by 7.RxB,ch, PxR; 8.QxQ. Be The far advanced passed pawn not only threatens to become a Queen, but also provides strong posts in the enemy camp for its side’s pieces. This is seen in the following examples. In position No. 319 White played 1. Kt — Q5 in order eventu- No. 318 No. 319 ee em ci a ott. i, a Ab Y rt. : a a “es ZG ‘aia dnn ty ty ae ee “4 Vinly £Y a eto APRA EARS) | ARS ABB Pa 8 a LeAEA 7 | pan ve ally to penetrate with his Rook to Q7. If 1.... Bx Kt, then 2.BxB, KtxB; 3.RxKt, BxP; 4. B-K5,ch, BxB; 5.QxB,ch, K-Ktl (if 5....Q-B3, then 6. P-—K7; or, if 5... R-B3, then 6.R-Q7, Q-Bl; 7. R—B7 and wins); 6. R — Q7, Q - B3; 7. P —- K7 and White wins for, if 7....R — B2, then 8. P —-K8(Q), ch (not R — Q8, ch??, since Black can make two captures at his Ql. An inexperienced player can easily overlook this guarding of Ql by Black’s Queen beyond the King’s pawn). If, instead, 7....QxQ, then 8. P x R(Q), ch after which White recaptures at his K5 and is a Rook ahead. In the actual game, the play after 1. Kt —-Q5 was 1.... B x Kt; 2.BxB, Kt—R4; 3. Q-—Ktd5, B-B3 (after the exchange of Queens the pawn has an unobstructed path); 4. B-—K5! (a piquant example of a cross-pin), P - B3; 5. B- QKt3, KR — K1 be. 204 THE MIDDLE GAME (QR — QI was better, although White after Q - K3 would have had the superior position); 6.R—Q7, Q-Bl; 7.R-B7, Q x R (Black had nothing better); 8. PxQ, RxB; 9.R~xR! and Black resigned for, if 9....BxQ, then 10. R—K8, ch and wins. * In position No. 320 the play was: 1. Kt - B5, P — Q5! (with a double attack on White’s Knight); 2. Ktx B (Kt x Kt was better), Px B (this passed pawn is now very strong. Black threatens Q -—B7, ch, followed by QxRP, ch); 3. B-B3 (if 3.Q-KB1, then Black wins a piece by _3.... Kt —Kté!; No. 320 No. 321 Ae oe Ben ek MAD RG GY AG g j . a7 la, ) Diy Fay fl A OW Hal A i mE a om SU Ba a ae AK Yea ae TN Gemwi ie a OW) ® 4.QxQ, KtxB,ch; 5.K-Bl, Kt-Kt6,ch), Kt-Q7; 4,.R-Bl, Kt-Q5; 5. K -R2 (if 5. Bx P, then 5.... Q — B7,ch followed by Kt —K7 leads to pretty mating continuations), Q-B5,ch; 6. K-R3, Kt(Q7)xB; 7.PxKt, P-K7; 8.Q-K1, QxBP, ch; 9.Q-Kt3 (if K -R2, then Q-Kt5, threatening to win the Queen by Kt-B6,ch), Q-B8, ch and wins. Position No. 321 gives a pretty illustration of the strength of the advanced passed pawn. The play was:, 1. P~Kt4, Q-—Q85 (this attacks both Rooks. The Queen’s Rook is also attacked since Black threatens to capture it and then, by advancing the passed pawn, make a new Queen, with mate next move—a very frequently occurring combination); 2. R —B7 (a counter-attack on Black’s QB2), THE MIDDLE GAME 205 QxR (RxB first was simpler); 3.RxP,ch, K-—-—Ktl; 4, R-Q7, ch, R xB; 5. RxR, ch, Kt xR; 6.Q x Q, R — QB6! and wins. The threat is R —B8, ch. If White plays 7.Q xR, then 7.... P—Q8(Q), ch, and mate next move. In the following example (No. 322) the attempt to turn to account the advanced passed pawn leads to more involved combinations: The play was: 1.RxB!, KtxR; 2.BxP!, KRxB (if 2.... QR xB, then 3.Q-Kt8, ch, Kt-Kl; 4. Px Kt(Q), ch, etc.); 3.QxKt, ch (the typical mancuvre), KxQ; 4. P- No. 322 No. 323 oe a] oe Ae LAY) “BE aZ Asty 7 ia Yy “— a “A, ‘a _ = oo — a ABAD “— foto a B8(Q), ch, K-Kt3 (if K-—R2, then R-B7, ch, followed by R-—Kt7, ch, etc.); 5.Q-B7,ch, K—Kt4; 6. Q-B8, ch, K —R5; 7. P—Kt3, mate. Position No. 323 shows complicated mating attacks event- ually yielding no more than a decisive passed pawn. The play was: 1.R-—R6! (forcing the simplification that follows. The mate at Black’s QR2 has to be prevented but, if the Rook is captured, then Bx P, ch at once wins the Queen), R-Q8, ch; 2. Kt-K1, RxKt, ch; 3.QxR, BxB; 4,.RxB, RxR; 5.QxR, PxR; 6.QxP,ch, Q-Kt2; 7.Q-K8, ch, Q-Ktl; 8.Q-K4,ch, Q-Kt2; 9.P-B6 (by his last two checks White has gained a tempo for the advance of the passed pawn), Q-B2 (if 9....Q-Bl, then 10. P-B7, ch, Q-—Kt2; 11. P—B8 (Q or R), mate); 206 THE MIDDLE GAME 10. Q-K8, ch, Q-Ktl; 11. Q -Q7 and, on account of the bad position of his Knight, Black has no means of preventing the further advance of the pawn. Steinitz once laid down the paradoxical principle ‘The Queen’s Rook’s pawn is the best one since it is furthest from the enemy King’’. The following two examples clearly sup- port this statement. In position No. 324 the play was: 1. P -QR4 (White’s Rook is correctly placed to support the pawn. The place for the Rooks is behind the passed pawns), R —Kt3 (Black vainly tries to ery work up an attacking position); 2.P—-R5, P-B4; 3.P-R6, ty YY, gs =6=9Q-K5; 4.P-KKt3, B-K2; x . . a yf * 5. Q — Kt5 (threatening Q — Kt7. ba If now 45....R-Kt3, then __ as 22 & GF 6. Q - Q7,B - Q3; 7. P- QKtA), Ao wy Y/ Q - B3; 6.QxQ,RxQ; 7.P- — WIL R7, B-Q3; 8. P-QKt4, PxP; — J aa ’ ae ’ ’ 7 Vi, — la 9.PxP (this pawn cannot be y 7m captured for, if 9.... BxP, ae wi 6 IL R-R&, P-B&;’ 12. BxP. Umi ° ia ’ = ) . xr, Vi eG co) RxB; 13. R(R4) x B, fol- lowed by R-Kt8), K -Ktl; 10. P-Kt5, R-B7; 11. KR-Ktl, K-B2; 12.P-Kté6, PxP; 13.RxP, B-B2; 14. R-Kt7, R-B3; 15. QR -Ktl (R —QB1 would also have won. The text move is more systematic; it is to make possible R — Kt8), K —K3; 16. R —- Kt8 and Black resigned for, after 16....BxR; 17. P xB (Q), RxQ; 18. R x R White is a Bishop to the good. ts 4g N SS ‘— . Sh WN Occasionally an advanced passed pawn is so strong that it neutralises an apparently irresistible attack on the King. Position No. 325 shows a very pretty example. White’s plan is there, ready to hand: to storm the enemy King’s position by P-Kt4 and P-Kt5. It is not easy to see what Black can do in reply. Actually he penetrates with his Rooks to QB7 and establishes a passed Queen’s Rook’s pawn. The play was: 1. Q — K2 (if P — Kt4 at once, then Kt — B3 wins THE MIDDLE GAME 207 the Queen), P—QR4; 2. Kt -B3, P—R5; 3. B—-Q1, B- QB3 (beginning a very fine manceuvre to make possible the pene- tration of the Rooks); 4. P - KKt4, P - B3; 5. Kt — R3, B —- K1; 6.Q-R2, B~B2; 7.P-R3, B-Kt6; 8. Kt — B2 (preparing to guard the Queen’s Knight’s pawn), BxB; 9. Kt xB, R-B7; 10.Q-Kt3, P—Kt5 (by this surprising manceuvre, the point of which is shown by his next move, Black establishes a passed Queen’s Rook’s pawn), 11. P x P, Q — R3! (now White must guard the Queen’s pawn, the key-stone of his position. If 12. Kt—K1, then Black by 12....R-Q7; 13. Q-B3, R —B8, forces White’s Knight at Ql] to move); 12. Kt — B2, RxP; 13.P-KKt5, RPxP; 14.PxP, R(Bl)-—B7 (this doubling of the Rooks on the seventh rank now exerts a powerful counter - pressure); 15. Kt —-Kt4, Q-Q3 (for the further protection of his King’s pawn. Ifnow 16.PxP,BxP; 17. Kt xB, Qx Kt, then Q- R38, ch would beastrong threat); 16.PxP, BxP; 17.Q-R3. Now White threatens to carry his attack to a successful con- clusion by 18. Kt xB, Q x Kt; 19. R-Kt6, Q-K2; 20. P- B6, PxP (if KtxP, then Q -—R8, ch); 21. R(B1) -KKtl1, Q-KB2; 22.Q-R8. Black makes no attempt to parry this threat but unfalteringly con- tinues his own attack. The further play was 17.... P — R6!; 18. Ktx B, Qx Kt; 19. R-Kt6, P—R7!; 20.RxQ, ch, PxR (now White’s attack is ended and Black, with his terrible threat of R — Kt8, has a winning position); 21. R - Q1, R — Kt8; 22. Q -— Bl, R(B7) —-QKt7; 23. Kt — Q2 (there is no other way of preventing R x R followed by R-—Kt8), RxR; 24.QxR, R x Kt! (if now Q x R, then the passed pawn becomes a Queen); 25.Q-QB1,R xP; 26. K — Kt2 (if, instead, the Queen checks, then the King escapes via KKt2 to KR1 where he is quite safe), R-QB6; 27. Q—QRI1 (not Q —Kt2 because of R — B7), R-B7, ch (R—QR6 also would have been good enough); 28. K —-B3, P—Q6; 29.Q-QI1 (if 29. K-—K3, then 29.... P—Q7; 30.K-—K2, R-—B8 and one of the passed pawns becomes a Queen), R — QKt7 (stronger than P — Q7); 30.Q — R4, No. 325 208 THE MIDDLE GAME P — Q7 and White resigned for after R — Kt8 one of the passed pawns becomes a Queen. In conclusion, another example (No. 326) of two united passed pawns: The play was: 1.Q-B5, Q-—Q3; 2. P—Kt4, Q -K2 (if 2.... K —R3, then 3. P-—Kt7!, KxP; 4.Q-—Kt6, mate—the so- called “Epaulette Mate’); 3.P-—Kt5!, PxP; 4.Q~xR, ch, RxQ; 5. R~xR (threatening, if the Queen goes, for example, to R6, to win by 6.R(B2)-B7,ch and 7.R-R8 mate. If 5.... Q — B4, the pin on the Rook is removed by 6. P —- Q4), QxR; 6.P-R6,ch!, K-Ktl; 7. P-—R7,ch, K-—-Kt2; 8. R xQ and the Rook’s pawn becomes a Queen. * % ADVANCED PAWwNs In the Middle Game a Rook’s pawn advanced to R6 consti- tutes a lasting threat to an op- ponent who has castled on that side. It acts like a piece and supports mating attacks, infact, with the Queen it often creates them. It is particularly strong if it can be guarded by a Bishop. In the End-Game also it can still be very strong. Steinitz strongly recommended allowing it to advance to KR6 and then playing P—KKt3. The advanced Rook’s pawn, according to him, would then be weak for the End-Game. He warned against the move P—-KR3 (instead of P - KKt3) as thereby the square KKt3 is weakened. But—if the pawn in front of the advanced Rook’s pawn is subsequently lost or exchanged, as may perhaps happen, then the passed pawn is a terrible force. Therefore never allow an enemy Rook’s pawn to advance to the sixth rank, but block it by playing your own Rook’s pawn one or two squares forward— a principle first enunciated by the author and diametrically opposed to the teaching of Steinitz. On this point, as on many others, I have been obliged to contest the teachings of that great theoretician. THE MIDDLE GAME 209 There are some examples which demonstrate the truth of my dictum: In position No. 327 White (Morphy) neglected to block Black’s King’s Rook’s pawn by P—KR3. The entire attack, which proved to be Black’s salvation, depended on the pawn advanc- ing to R6. The play was: 1.P-—B4, P-R6!; 2. P—KKt3 (that it would have been quite wrong to capture the pawn requires no detailed demonstration. Black’s Rooks would have had convenient targéts for attack in the King’s Rook’s file), B-K3; 3. Q —- B3, R — Q2; 4. KR -Q], P- B4;5.K -Ktl (the effect of the opening of the diagonal from White’s QB6 to his KR] is already being felt—a result of P -R6), KR —-Q1 (overlooking the loss of the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn which could be avoided by Q-B3 fol- lowed, if necessary, by P — Kt3); NOvoet 6. Q—-R3, P—R3 (B x P would Ye Y bo be bad because after R —-QB1 | @imemia the attack al the Q £7 Bishop ‘sfile would be devastat- 40 # a Le tZ );. Bx P,Q-B3;8.B-Q6 GF (ab P-B3 oe Wa (absolutely essential!), Wy 4 Uy” py (the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn i Ws Bk a7) a J still cannot be captured be- Y Ze Wy cause of the attack along the RF %, Z yey Y/ “y Queen’s Bishop’s file which Wy would result after White’s reply ui gy 8 ne P — Kt3); 9. R — Q5!(P x Pis out of the question because of the reply R x B. White is so harassed by the continuous threat of mate at his KKt2 that he has left no continuation that offers the slightest chance except this offer of the sacrifice of the exchange with the threat of winning the Queen by R-B5),BxR; 10.RxB, Rx B!; 11. P xR (to win the Queen by 11. R —- B5 would be very unprofitable—for by 11.... R-Q8, ch; 12. K -B2, R(Q1) - Q7, ch; 13. K -K3, R — Q6, ch Black would win back the Queen and be a Rook ahead), K—Ktl; 12. Q—-Q3? (an oversight which costs the most valuable pawn. But also after any other move, e.g. P —Kt3, White can no longer win since he is too strongly threatened by Black’s Queen in conjunction with the ad- vanced pawn, eg. 12.P—-Kt3, Q-Kl1; 13.Q-Bl, Q-K5 —again threatening Q-—-Kt7, mate—; 14.Q-Q2, Q-Kt8, ch; 15. K—B2, Q-—KR8; 16. K—K3, Q-K5, ch; 17. K—- a por 210 THE MIDDLE GAME B2, Q-kKt7, ch—once again, that effective pawn!—and draws). The further play (after 12. Q-—Q3?) was: 12....R xP! (of course, the Rook cannot be captured because of Q — Kt7, mate. That sort of thing must be seen!), 138.Q-Q2, RxR; PxR, Q —B4, ch; 15. K-B1. Now it is Black who has the advan- tage and he can play to win the passed pawn by K — B2 and K -—Q3. Actually, he contented himself with a draw by per- petual check: 15....Q-—B5, ch; 16.'K — B2, Q- B4, ch, etc. The following example (No. 328) is on similar lines. After 1. P—K¢ White has a splendid position. But he has omitted to block Black’s King’s Rook’s pawn by P —- KR3 and Black takes advantage of this to develop a counter-action by WY, WY, Ujiy Ye which he restores equality: 1.... Ag Ros yer = P_RO!; 2. P- Kt3, Kt Q3!!; Rak 22 | ‘ag ey rN we 3. P—K5, Q-Kt3; 4. Px Kt, ZG Y £ Y Q-K5 (threatening Q #Kt7, Uy Y Ye Gi mate. The King’s Rook’s pawn Cl Le, J. [= acts like a nies): 5. R.- Bo, WR BB & Q-K8,ch; 6.R-Bl,Q-K7, Go GY Y 7.R-B2, Q-K8,ch with a YkGY draw by . epetition of moves. “a W. OB g (After |. . Q -—K5 an attempt i Gath Yi El Z tor, “ye With the King would be ~ Ury dangerous for after 5. K — B2, Q - Kt7, ch; 6. K -K1, Q x RP the advanced pawn would be a very dangerous passed one.) Not only the Rook’s pawn but also any other pawn that has advanced to the sixth rank, even though it may not be a passed pawn, exerts a strong pressure on the opponent. I have already shown this for a pawn at KB6 in the section “The Attack with the King’s Bishop’s Pawn” (Nos. 228-231). How- ever, it is the,Rook’s pawn that most frequently advances so far. enviar * chi- The eect is singn .r, but much less pronounced, with a pawn that has advanced to the fifth rank. There the pawns—they THE MIDDLE GAME 211 are generally centre or Bishops’ pawns—always cramp the opponent’s game. This is particularly true of the King’s pawn, whose main effect after it has advanced to K5 is to drive away from the enemy’s KB3 his King’s Knight—the best protection of a castled position on the King’s side—so that the King is exposed to manifold attacks. But, on the other hand, pawns on the fifth rank provoke a counter-action by the enemy pawns. Thus, for example, a pawn at K5 is attacked by P —- K B39; if it can be defended—a necessary postulate for the move P ~ K5— then so far so good. If, on the contrary, it has to capture the King’s Bishop’s pawn, then tempi are lost, the tempi it has cost to establish the pawn at K5, and, in addition, a file is opened for the enemy Rook. A further consideration is that, if a pawn has advanced to the fifth rank, the pawn guarding it may be subjected to a quite typical attack by an advance of a pawn to the enemy’s fourth rank—and this may be a very effective counter-action. Thus the move P-—K5 provokes the counter-move P-QB4 (to attack the Queen’s pawn), P-Q5 provokes P —-KB4, while the nfoves P—KB5 and P -QB5 provoke P-Q4 and P-—K4 respectively; in any case with a freeing of the opponent’s game and a perceptible and sometimes a greater counter-pressure. Therefore, before advancing a pawn to the fifth rank, all these possibilities must be taken into consideration and carefully weighed one against another. One must always remember Steinitz’s words, ‘“‘“A pawn cannot move backward’’. Often enough one has cause to regret having advanced a pawn. . THE Potnr QB6 as a TaRGET FOR ATTACK A typ ob. gk on the Queen’s side is very frequently possible w°-_.i by playing P — QB3 the opponent has given it an objective. The Queen’s Bishop’s pawn is advanced to B5, the Queen’s Knight’s to Kt5 and eventually the Queen’s Rook’s to R6 (if possible). Then the Queen’s Rook’s pawn is ex- changed for the Queen’s Knight’s and the Qu«v.i's Knight’s for the enemy pawn at QB3. Thus the ad .iced Queen’s Bishop’s pawn has become a passed one.vtionmn addition all kinds of lines of attack are opened. Thit 13. Ge, which is the main type of Queen’s side attack, is emplo + ¢. in the following example (No. 329): 212 THE MIDDLE GAME The play was: 1.P-B5, B-K2; 2.B-KB4, Q-QI; 3. P-—-QKt4, Kt -Bl; 4. P -KR3 (guarding his King’s Bishop against exchange by Kt-—R4), B-Q2; 5. P-—QR4 (better than P —- Kt5 at once, to which Black would reply with P x P), Q-Bl; 6.P-Kt5, Kt-—Ré4 (after the opponent has played P—KR3 this move is purposeless. But White has already obtained a strong attacking position on the Queen’s side, while Black is very cramped and suffers from a lack of good moves); 7.B-R2, B-Ql1; 8.P-—R5, B-B2 (if 8....PxP, then 9.KtxKtP, BxKt; 10.BxB, Kt-—Q2; 11. P—R6, estab- lishing a passed Queen’s Bishop’s pawn); 9.BxB, Q xB; 10. P—R6!, P—QKt3 (if KtP x P, then P x BP! again estab- pees lishes a passed Queen’s Bishop’s ee pawn); 11.KtP xP, BxPI; Y Y VY | ee ee eg. White. has « pused Queen as Rook’s pawn. Moreover, he i4 Yj, will play 13. Kt-QKt5 and ve ieee es rns oe the yy yyy Wy xchange by 14. Kt ~ Q6, or, 7 to ‘a DT) ter 13... Q - Q2, the Bishop ORAZ by 14.Kt-K5. Admittedly, ty YY & YY after the text-move, the Queen’s eo & BE: side attack has not resulted in Vi is the establishment of a passed pawn. but it has opened lines of attack. Furthermore, the Queen’s Rook’s pawn is very strong and provides support for White’s pieces. White’s superiority is very, very great). The continuation was: 13. KR —Ktl, Q -Q1 (if Q - B2?, then Kt -QKt5); 14. Kt -K5, B—-Q2 (if R-B1, then White wins the Exchange by Kt x B followed by B-~Kt5. After the text-move a pawn is lost); 15. Kt xB, Kt x Kt!; 16. B x P, ch! (White attacks on the Queen’s side and wins a pawn on the other!), K —-R1; 17. B— Q3 (to avoid being imprisoned by P — Kt3), Kt -Kt3; 18. Kt — R4! (to clear the Queen’s Knight’s file), Kt x Kt; 19. Q x Kt (White’s position has been still further strengthened), R-—K2; 20. R —Kt7, R -Bl; 21.QR - Kt], KR —- B2; 22.R xR, Q xR; 23.R — Kt7, Q — B8, ch; 24. K — R2, Q — Q7; 25. Q —- Q7, R - B1?; 26.Q x BP! (the Queen cannot be captured because of R-Kt8, ch and mate next move), and White wins. After 22....R xR! (instead of Q x R), White would also have THE MIDDLE GAME 213 obtained a decisive advantage, e.g. 23. Q—Kt4 (threatening Q-Kt8), R-Bl; 24. Q-Kt7, R-B2; 25. Q-—Kt8, Q-QBI; 26.QxQ, ch, RxQ; 27. R-Kt7. * ¥ THe Porst QKT6 as A TARGET FOR ATTACK. TURNING A FLANK Just as a pawn at QB3 is a target for an attack by the Queen’s Knight’s pawn, and a pawn at KB3 or KR3 for an attack by the King’s Knight’s pawn, so, in just the same way, a pawn at QKt3 affords a target for an attack by the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. This, if nothing prevents it, advances to R5. If the Knight’s pawn captures it, then after the recapture the hostile Queen’s Rook’s pawn, being isolated in a file which is open for the opponent, is, therefore, very weak. If the Knight’s pawn doesnot capture, No. 330 ey YY wt mea: SS “so taal £7 if Gag a es then the attacker opens the Queen’s Rook’s file for his Rook, by playing RP xP; but only after he has made quite certain that he can obtain and main- — Ae hk "ype “yyy ee | an gel Y ty Wy tain complete control of that Dy 7 file. To this end, if his opponent either threatens to oppose a Rook at his QR1 or already has one there, the attacker must double Rooks on the file he is to open, occasionally even also to place the Queen in that file, before he plays RP xP. With this doubling or trebling one generally compels the enemy Rook, which is indirectly twice or three times attacked, to move away. Now the game pro- ceeds according to the scheme of attack with a Rook along an open file (No. 300 ff.). The Rook penetrates to the seventh rank, thus establishing itself in the enemy camp. If then the other Rook or the Queen can come up in support, there can result a complete turning of the flank, which is extremely dangerous, since the attacker, if everything else is guarded, can generally find a welcome target for attack in the pawn at QKt6. The only defence against this is a counter-attack on the other wing or in the centre. The following example (No. 330) in its illustration of all these circumstances is extremely instructive; 214 THE MIDDLE GAME Here the play was: 1....P-QKt4; 2. P —-Kt3? (this is a very obvious move but a decisive mistake for it permits the attack with the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. White should not move the Knight’s pawn at all but, if and when necessary, guard his Queen’s Bishop’s pawn with the Rook at present at Ql. If Black ever exchanges the pawns, White must, if it is necessary, exchange his endangered Knight for the Bishop), R — Kt2 (here and in the next few moves Black displays some uncertainty and loses some tempi. The plan demands P-—Kt5 at once, followed by the advance of the Queen’s Rook’s pawn); 3. P—-KR3, K-Rl; 4. B-R2, B-QI1; 5. P—-KKt4. (White sees the coming danger and works up a counter-attack, that calls for the most correct defence. 5.... BP x P would be very bad for after 6. RP x P White’s pawns would begin to move in a crushing advance. White avoided a similar mistake at his second move, when he rejected PxP. 5....P—Kt3 would also be bad, for then Black would commit precisely the same mistake as his opponent has been guilty of by playing 2. P-—Kt3. White would exploit the mistake by 6. P-Ktd followed by the advance of the King’s Rook’s pawn to R35, naturally with the necessary support from the major pieces, and this would here be all the more dangerous since on the King’s Rook’s file that is to be opened there stands the excep- tionally sensitive King). The continuation was 5.... Q —KB2! (this is the correct defence. Black supports his KB4 with a piece and creates no weakness. Every pawn move loosens the position); 6. Q—-KB3, R-R2; 7. P—Kt5 (White cannot break through on the King’s side and therefore closes it. He should rather have left the un- settled position there unaltered for then he would have occupied his opponent’s attention there and prevented him from devoting all his forces to the Queen’s side), P—Ktd (at last!); 8. B-Kt3, P-QR4; 9. P-KR4, P-—R5 (we see that, were it not for White’s move P —- QKt3, Black’s attack on the Queen’s side would lack an objective, just as White’s on the King’s side, which, since Black has not played P —- KKt3, lacks the condition necessary for success or even for its very existence. If White’s King’s Rook’s pawn advances to R6, then Black plays P —-Kt3 and White does not obtain an open file for his major pieces); 10. R - KKt2 (it is clear that after 10. P x P the pawn at White’s QR2 would be very weak. Now, however, the Queen’s Knight’s pawn is his ““Heel of Achilles’), THE MIDDLE GAME 215 P x P (Black could have delayed this exchange and first doubled his Rooks on the Queen’s Rook’s file. He would have been forced to delay it, if White had posted his Rooks at QR1 and Q1, for otherwise the outcome of the whole attacking manceuvre would have been nothing more than an exchange of Rooks. Indeed, by inexact play on the part of the attacker, White might, perhaps, have got possession of the open file and so obtained an advantage); 11.PxP, R-R6; 12. B-B2, Q-R2; 138. R-Q3, R-R8,ch; 14. K-R2, R-QKt8 (now the Queen threatens to advance. We see how White’s position on the Queen’s side is systematically outflanked); 15. R - Ql, R — Kt7; 16. B—K1 (in order, as far as possible, to exchange the decisive forces), Q -R7; 17. Rx R, Q xR, ch; 18. K — Kt3, R — B2 (Black brings up his last reserve to join in the flanking movement); 19. Q — Q3 (White has defended very skilfully and now forces his opponent to weaken his King’s position a little in order to free his Rook), P—Kt3; 20. R —Q2, Q-R&8; 21. R-Ql1, Q-—Rl (in order to send the Rook on ahead); 22. B —- B2, R—R2; 23. Q -KB3, R-R7; 24. R —- Q3, R - Kt7; 25. B-—Ktl, Q-R8; 26. B-B2, Q-QB8 (R-—Kt8 would be bad. Not the ponderous Rook but the mobile Queen must lead the attack and operations must take place not on the eighth rank but on the seventh. At the same time White’s cardinal weakness, the Queen’s Knight’s pawn, must be threatened continuously); 27. R —Q1 (the defender is short of moves), Q-—B7; 28. R-Q3. Now the flanking movement is completed and nearly all White’s pieces are pinned. But also everything is defended. Against such a constricted position mating attacks will usually be possible. Here Black’s simplest method of winning is to bring his Knight to QR4 and so attack the Queen’s Knight’s pawn a third time. However, he must first bring his King up to White’s passed pawn, for a passed pawn must always be blocked. It is, however, desirable to start by exchanging Queens so that the King may thus venture out into the open. Black therefore plays Q — K7 and exchanges Queens, if White does not make the exchange. If White exchanges, then Black immediately plays his Rook back to QKt7 so that White’s Rook is tied to the defence of the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. Then Black plays his King to KB2 and finally his Knight via KB1, Q2, QKtl and QB3 to QR4 and against this White is helpless. If he plays his Knight to B6, Black captures it. The united passed pawns White obtains 216 THE MIDDLE GAME after KtP x B can accomplish nothing with Black’s King posted at KB2. Then White’s Queen’s Knight’s pawn and finally his Queen’s Bishop’s pawn are lost and with them the game. All the result of his 2. P- QKt3. 4% A game of chess is symbolic of war. The Opening corresponds to the mobilisation and strategic advance of the armies, fol- lowed by the preliminary skirmishes. The Middle Game, how- ever, resembles the battle proper, the decisive battle. A good game of chess is decided in the Middle Game. For the conduct of the Middle Game, as regards both tactics and strategy, we have, in our study of the typical combinations and attacks (Nos. 99-330), made ourselves familiar with the raw material. The player who carefully studies this colossal material until he makes it his own should be able to cope with any situation. Tactics are the most important element in the Middle Game. We must above all see what is more or less hidden. We must exploit opportunities for combination whenever they are offered. Here there is only an illusory guard, there our oppo- nent has a man quite unguarded, or a double attack, etc., is possible. Over and over again there occur the tactical manceuvres which we have discussed in detail in the foregoing pages, and these opportunities must frequently be created by a sacrifice. Mistakes by our opponent must be recognised as such, and also those that we ourselves are about to make. The strategic conduct of the Middle Game generally arises out of the Opening. Frequently one of the players has secured a slight advantage in the Opening and this must be further developed in the Middle Game. Often the pawn formation shows the direction the attack is to take. Let us suppose that in the Opening a player has obtained a pawn superiority on the King’s side. Then these pawns advance to the attack. If White has pawns at his K5 and KB85, the result is either a passed pawn at his K6 or a wedge driven into Black’s position at KB6, or the breaking up of Black’s castled position. If the pawn superiority is on the Queen’s side, then the pawns advance and a passed pawn results. The attack on the King’s side is certainly of gréater penetrative force, and, in most definite opposition to Steinitz, I cannot but maintain this. An attack on the King may result in a mate, whereas a Queen’s side attack, even in the most favourable circumstances, results only THE MIDDLE GAME 217 in a passed pawn, and thus possibly in a new Queen. We must not imagine however that we can attack wherever we wish. In chess, to play correctly, we can never do what we wish, we must do only what we are forced to do, what the position demands. Positional play, that is to say, playing according to the position, is the only correct method, and from it com- binations result of themselves. We must attack where we are strong and our opponent weak. We should always attempt to occupy the strong points in our own and the weak points in our opponent’s game, at the same time striving to prevent the occupation of such points by our opponent. Each position must be regarded as a problem, where it is a question of finding the correct move, almost always only one, demanded by that position. In a game of chess secondary solutions are almost non-existent, except in the first moves of the Opening where there is freedom of choice. Frequently, particularly when one player already has a very definite advantage, it seems as though there are several equally good moves at his disposal. On closer examination, however, it usually becomes obvious that one move is the strongest, the very strongest, and there- fore the only correct move. Ifa player has a not very decided advantage, then, when several moves come under considera- tion, not only is one the strongest, but others actually prove disadvantageous, and in chess there is nothing more difficult than to choose the best, the only correct move, from several of apparently equal worth. If in the Middle Game we have obtained an advantage in material, then we shall strive to utilise it to bring about a winning conclusion. We shall attempt to simplify the game by exchanges and enter into an end-game where the advantage in material becomes even more effective. But often an advantage in material obtained in the Middle Game gives new impetus to our attack. At such times, however, we must care- fully avoid every risk. For with an advantage in material— ceteris partbus—the game is already decided, and it would be foolish indeed to place victory in jeopardy by some doubtful combination. If we have emerged from the Opening with a somewhat inferior position, then we must endeavour to repair the damage. If, for example, Black has had to give up the centre, and has a pawn at Q3 as against White’s pawn at his K4, or at K3 as against White’s pawn at his Q4, then he will strive to neutralise 218 THE MIDDLE GAME the opposing centre pawn by playing in the first case P - Q4, in the second P — K4, or, if possible, P- KB4 or P—QB¢4 re- spectively. We must attempt to advance a backward pawn, and, above all, to catch up our opponent in development if we have lagged behind. In addition we shall attempt, as soon as our opponent allows us sufficient time, to play to a better posi- tion a badly posted piece, for example a Knight on the edge of the board. If, as does not occur very frequently, the game is even after the Opening, then we must clearly realise that from such a position it is very difficult to win, but very easy to lose. In such a case we must be doubly careful, and avoid creating any weaknesses. Pawn moves especially are calculated to produce them. Nevertheless, in direct contrast to the Opening, it is generally necessary in the Middle Game, particularly when the End-Game is approaching, to create a way out for the castled King. Then we shall play P-KR3 if our opponent has a Bishop on the white squares, e.g. at his QKt2, and P-KKt3 if he has one on the Black, e.g. at his Q3, (naturally taking into account all other considerations). But if a position is even, it is very far from drawn. Just play on quietly, and often from an even position the better player gains the advantage. Obviously this is only possible with the help of one’s opponent, but it is so easy to make mistakes. Even if they are not grave mistakes, yet against a master, a very few inferior moves are sufficient to turn the scale in his favour. kkKkx PART 4 THE OPENING (2) GENERAL SECTION Tut THrory or Curss. THE PRINCIPLES OF PLAY. THE GENERAL THEORY OF THE OPENING Force, Space and Time. Force is represented by the pieces which each player has at his disposal, and these are symbols of Force. Space is represented by the board upon which the men are arranged in accordance with a definite pur- pose. Time, since the players move alternately, is represented by the enjoyment of the right—or the fulfilment of the obliga- tion—to move. Any one of these three factors can be trans- formed into any other. Time can be changed into Space or Force, or vice versa. One can sacrifice Force, for example, a pawn, in order to gain a tempo or, instead, to open a line, 1.e. to gain Space. When a pawn is won, this is generally at the cost of one or more tempi. Force has been won but Time lost. Time has been transformed into Force. Let us now consider these three factors more closely. Te game of chess is made up of three basic factors— THe Forces These consist of pieces and pawns. The pieces are much stronger. A minor piece is usually considered as worth about three pawns. A pawn can be valued at three tempi. A gambit in which for the sacrifice of a pawn one obtains an advantage in development of three tempi is well worth playing. The King is the most important piece since when he is unable to avoid capture the gameisatanend. Therefore, the greatest precautions must be taken for his safety. Since after the advance of the centre pawns his position is no longer quite secure, it is usual to castle as soon as possible and thus bring him into a position of safety. The permanent loss of the right to castle or the temporary inability to do so is often a serious disadvantage. Castling on the King’s side is more frequent. 219 220 THE OPENING Sometimes, however, castling on the Queen’s side is very effective, especially if the Queen’s file is open so that the Queen’s Rook at once comes strongly into action, or again if it is desired to storm with pawns the enemy King castled on the King’s side. Insuch an attack, far less caution is necessary if one’s own King stands on the other flank. While there are still many pieces on the board, in the Opening and the Middle- Game, the King plays a purely passive rédle. Nevertheless, after castling he forms a convenient and effective guard for the pawns on that flank. In the End-Game the very con- siderable power of the King, greater than that of a minor piece, is developed to the full. He must then be moved, as far as is compatible with his safety, right into the enemy camp, where he can capture pawns, hold up the enemy pawns and lead his own pawns on to queen. The Queen is by far the strongest piece. She, too, should not be prematurely brought into play during the Opening, for she will be attacked by weaker pieces and driven back, and thus the opponent will develop his game and gain tempi. It is very dangerous to make a raid with the Queen early on in the game. In particular the capture of the Queen’s Knight’s pawn with the Queen often brings its own revenge. It is best, in the Opening, to make but one move with the Queen, and that to a square where she is not exposed to any direct or indirect attack, so especially not to a file in which there is an opposing Rook, no matter how many men there may be in between. Time and again this vis-a-vis of the Queen and an enemy Rook proves to her disadvantage. Thus in the Queen’s Gambit the best move for the Queen is to K2. The ideal to be aimed at is that after the other pieces have carried out the attack, the Queen shall hurry up to give the mate. The Rook can most profitably come into action when a file has been opened for it. If it can occupy and keep such an open file, this is a great advantage, for ultimately the Rook pene- trates along to the seventh rank, and there threatens not only all the pawns but also the King. Occasionally, but less fre- quently, zig-zag Rook moves are used to bring the Rook before its own pawn front to an attack on a castled position, e.g. R(KB1) - B3 —-KR3, or, a very elegant, effective and sur- prising development, R(QR1) — R3 — R3, or still more subtle, P —KRé4, R -KR3, R —- KKt3. When making these zig-zag moves with the Rook, we must THE OPENING 221 always consider whether our first rank is sufficiently guarded, for often, when the base is threatened, the Rook is unable to return quickly enough to protect it. Rooks should always be united—‘“doubled”—as quickly as possible. One very real disadvantage of an inability to castle is that a union between the Rooks is prevented. Doubled Rooks on the seventh rank are nearly always devastatingly effective. Like Bishops, Rooks which attack a pawn triangle, e.g. a Rook at KKt1 (or a Bishop at QKt1) against pawns at the opposing KB2, KKt3 and KR2 “bite on granite’. Therefore against such an attack along a half-open line, the establishment of such a pawn triangle is generally the best defence. The Bishop is of all pieces the most easily threatened with complete imprisonment and even capture by pawns, as I have already pointed out in the section on the Middle Game. Still more frequently does it occur that a player cramps or shuts in a Bishop of his own accord. Such play naturally is quite unsound. You would think it a painfully obvious postulate that all pieces shall be free to move, and yet this principle is very often sinned against. The typical example of such a voluntary shutting in of a Bishop is Philidor’s Defence (1. P—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, P-—Q3.) This is, naturally, unsound play. As a result, after Black’s subsequent moves, Kt —-KB3, B —K2 and Castles (KR) the Bishop has no move at all. Pieces that move in straight lines we must try to bring to open ones, instead of, as here, closing the open diagonal of the Bishop. Further, a Bishop should be so posted that, when- ever possible, it commands two open diagonals. For example, in the position sketched above, the Queen’s Bishop, had it been played to K3, would have been effective towards both flanks. The King’s Bishop is the best attacking piece. In the Opening it often, when posted at QB4, attacks the hostile KB2, the weakest point in the enemy position as at first it is guarded only by the King. Also, after the opponent has castled on the King’s side, a Bishop at Q3 threatens KR2, and thus often lays the foundation of a mating attack. The King’s Bishop is also very strong in defence. Bishops and pawns which defend each other form a bulwark that will resist any attack. Ifa Bishop is on a white square, then the pawns must, wherever possible, be placed on black, for otherwise they rob the Bishop of much 222 THE OPENING of its effectiveness. That, in the End-Game, a Bishop holds up the advance of pawns much more easily than a Knight, we have already demonstrated in the section on the End-Game. Generally, throughout the whole game, a Bishop is stronger than three pawns, but again this depends on the position. The Knight is chiefly useful for attack, and must therefore be advanced as far as possible into, or at least against, the enemy camp, but not in the Opening. Then the Knight should, when- ever possible, make one move and one move only, to the third rank, since from there it can already look into the enemy half of the board. In the centre (at K5) and guarded by a pawn, the Knight forms a very strong advance post. On the other hand, a Knight at the edge of the board is generally badly placed, since it commands too few squares. In the same way, it has been my experience that a Knight at QKt3 is usually badly placed. Asa guard for one particular point the Knight is far less suited than a Bishop, but this is not the case when a whole section of territory has to be guarded. Thus a Knight at KB3 is the best defence of a castled position on the King’s side, and we can say that, as the King’s Bishop is the best attacking piece, so the King’s Knight is the best defensive one. In the End-Game a Knight has a difficult task against pawns, and then three pawns are usually better than a Knight. The pawns are by no means of equal value. In and near the centre they are at their strongest, and decrease in value the nearer they stand to the edge of the board. Therefore if it is possible to capture a piece with either of two pawns, one makes a point of capturing towards the centre. In the Opening you should move only a few pawns, just as many as are necessary for the development of the pieces, for, remember, every pawn move loosens the position. In the Middle Game too, nothing so easily ruins a position as pawn moves. I have often expressed this jokingly to my pupils thus—‘‘Never move a pawn and you will never lose a game’’. In the Opening it is necessary to move the centre pawns in order to make an outlet for the Queen and the two Bishops. To move the King’s Bishop’s pawn in the Opening is very dangerous since it leaves the King’s side far too exposed. On the other hand, in games opened with 1. P — Q4 it is generally desirable to move the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. The Knight's pawns differ in value. It is often a doubtful advantage to THE OPENING 223 capture the Queen’s Knight’s pawn with a Queen. If, however, the Queen takes the King’s Knight’s pawn, the result is usually a very strong attack. Thus the King’s side and the Queen’s are not of equal importance; the King’s side is far more im- portant. Thus after 1.P—K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3; 4. B-Kt5, B—Kt5; 5. P xP, QxP,; 6.BxKt, Bx Kt, ch; 7. PxB, PxB the doubling of the pawns is for White a strengthening of the Queen’s side, for Black a breaking up of the King’s. The advance of the King’s Knight’s pawn to Kt3 followed by the development of the King’s Bishop on the flank (i.e. at KKt2), the so-called Fianchetto (= flank play), very favoured by Louis Paulsen and also often adopted by Steinitz, has been frequently played in the last few years. There is also much to be said for it if the diagonal from White’s KKt2 to his QKt7 is open, for then Black’s Queen’s Knight’s pawn is threatened all the time. (With the Bishop developed at Q3, however, it is the King’s Rook’s pawn, and with it the King, that is attacked—and this is much more forcible. A King is well protected by a Bishop at KKt2 and an attack on his castled position is not so easy to carry out. The posting of the Queen’s Bishop on a flank (P— QKt3 followed by B—QKt2) has long been customary in the Queen’s Pawn Opening. In the Ruy Lopez (1. P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B — Kt5) I introduced the flank development of the Queen’s Bishop—at Kt2—in an attack against the Steinitz Defence (3.... P - Q3) and there the Bishop proved to be admirably posted. Nearly always the result was a mating attack on KKt7. The move P—KKt4 I always call the “suicide move’. It brings about a terrible loosening of the King’s side, for which the only possible justification is the commencement of a strong attack or the securing of some immediate advantage. Moves with the Rook’s pawn (P —-KR3) in order to prevent B or Kt —- KKt5 are, in the Opening, nearly always to be con- demned. Concerning the targets for attack that these moves produce I have already written at some length in the section dealing with the Middle Game. In the Middle Game, and after the exchange of several pieces, the moves P-KR3 or P —KKt3 are often necessary to avoid the threat of mate on one’s first rank. 224 THE OPENING THe RELATIVE VALUES OF THE MEN We must be absolutely clear on this point. The estimates I gave in this respect in the section devoted to the Elements are completely false for more advanced players. The Queen is zot as strong as the two Rooks, or as three minor pieces—generally, ceteris paribus, the pieces are stronger. Two Rooks can make a double attack on any point and thus they are superior to the Queen. Only if the King of the player having two Rooks is in an insecure position and exposed to many checks, is the Queen stronger. The same considerations hold good in respect of the minor pieces. They must always be well protected by pawns. If the pieces are insecurely placed in their fight against the Queen, a lost game is nearly always the result. A Rook, a minor piece and a passed pawn on the sixth rank are stronger than a Queen. The Exchange, the difference between a Rook and a minor piece is, according to my reckoning, equal to 14 pawns. The difference between two minor pieces and a Rook is exactly the same. A Rook and two pawns are stronger than two minor pieces to the extent of 4apawn. The validity of this reckoning holds more for the End-Game, not for the Opening and the first part of the Middle Game, where, as a rule, the pawns have not their full effective- ness, whereas the minor pieces are predominant. Two minor pieces are 4 a pawn stronger than a Rook and a pawn. Ifa pawn at KB2 is attacked by Bishop and Knight, then castling on the King’s side completely guards it. You must be quite clear about the relative values of Bishop and Knight. They are by no means of equal value. The Bishop is generally the stronger piece throughout the whole game. Only when a Knight stands in the centre, on the King’s, Queen’s or either Bishop’s file, and on the fourth to the sixth rank, guarded, if possible, by a pawn and not assailable by a pawn, is it superior to a Bishop. Then it controls half the board and is nearly as strong as a Rook. This exceptionally important principle, first enunciated by me, lent clarity and certainty to the previ- ously existing conduct of the game. For purposes of calcula- tion minor pieces may be reckoned as approximately equal to three pawns but we mu.:t realise that in actual play such an assessment may often be frlse. A Bishop is generally worth more than three pawns, so to is a Knight in the Opening and in the Middle Game. It is, however, all a question of the THE OPENING 225 general position, and particularly of that of the pawns. If they are not scattered but concentrated on one flank, far advanced and united, then they are frequently worth more than even a Bishop. That the pawns increase in value the nearer they are to the centre files, I have already stated. If one player has a centre pawn against a Knight’s pawn, then he has a slight advantage, since in the Middle Game the effectiveness of a centre pawn proves quite different from that of a Queen’s Knight’s pawn. The centre pawn is useful in attack, the Queen’s Knight’s pawn is generally only of use in the End-Game. Ifyou have captured & pawn, you must ask yourself which pawn more you actually have. It may be that you have taken the Queen’s Knight’s pawn but are the Queen’s pawn ahead. SPACE When the pieces are set out at the beginning of the game, each player is limited to two ranks. Yet, actually, each is entitled to the command of four ranks, White over his half of the board, Black over his. Therefore, at once, with his opening moves, each player takes possession of the four ranks that are his by right, by advancing pawns, and soon pieces as well, to his fourth rank, for the more space a player commands the freer his game and the easier his development. On the other hand, if a player is limited to only three ranks, he is at a dis- advantage. Naturally, this eer misfortune can result only from faulty play on his part, as, for he @ SE le A dy a example, after the moves 1. P — Ae tie ry K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, P- mS mS. a Q3?; 3.P-Q4,P x P?; 4.QxP. ‘ A x -, Mia “a, VA, _- A, SS In position No. 331 the Space equality has been destroyed in White’s favour. He has occu- pied four ranks, and Black only three, while the fifth is free. In all such positions—all other things being equal of course— White has the advantage. As far as Space is concerned, we must always endeavour to main- tain equality (This Black here gave up by 3.... Px P). o 226 THE OPENING Within the Space at our disposal we must place the pieces as effectively as possible, so that those pieces cannot be attacked but are in permanently strong positions. In the disposition of the pawns, which forms the skeleton of the position, we must, as the game progresses, take care, as far as possible, that no pawn becomes backward, especially if it is in a file open to the opponent, for a backward pawn in an open file constitutes a grave positional weakness. At such times weak points are formed, gaps in a position, into which, sooner or later, enemy pieces can settle without our being able to drive them away. A “‘hole”’ is the name given by Steinitz to a square on the third or fourth rank, in front of a pawn whose immediate neighbours have been either moved or taken. If, for example, from the original position, the moves are 1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. P- QB4, then the pawn at White’s Q2 is backward, and White’s Q3 and Q4 are weak points, for he has no pawn to drive off enemy pieces that may be posted there. Of less importance is the isolation of a pawn. In particular it is often quite impossible to avoid the isolation of the Queen’s pawn. For example, after 1.P-—Q4, P-Q4; 2. P- QB4 (the Queen’s Gambit), Px P; 3. P-K3, P-—K4!; 4. Bx P!, Px P; 5. P x P, White has made quite irreproachable moves, and yet his Queen’s pawn is isolated. (In return he has obtained the previously mentioned territorial advantage and, in addition, he commands the centre with his pawn). Yet I must not conceal from my pupils that everybody considers the isolated Queen’s pawn a grave disadvantage. The great teacher Steinitz also did so. My opinion on the isolated Queen’s pawn is as follows. The isolated Queen’s pawn is weak only when it is not guarded by a Bishop, and not always then. The pawn can usually be quite well guarded in some other way. The advantage for one’s opponent lies in the creation for him, in front of the isolated pawn, of a strong point which cannot be attacked by any enemy pawn. He can occupy this point with a piece (generally a Knight) that cannot be dislodged, and which is then really excellently posted. Thus after the moves of the Queen’s Gambit set out above: 1. P—Q4, P-Qé4; 2. P-QB4, Px P; 3. P-K3, P-K4!; 4.Bx P,P xP; 5.P xP, the square in front of the isolated pawn, White’s Q3, is a strong point for Black, for he will occupy it by playing his King’s Knight there via KB3 or his Queen’s via Q2 and QKt3. But, in return, White has a counter advantage—he will play his THE OPENING 227 King’s Knight via KB3 to K5, where it will be even better posted than Black’s Knight at his Q4, and from which square it is as good as impossible for Black to dislodge it save by playing P-KB3, thus loosening his King’s side. If, as so often is the case, in return for an isolated Queen’s pawn, you have gained an advantage in position or in tempo, then this pawn is an advantage and an effective starting-point for an attack. If you are behind in development, then the isolated pawn is a disadvatage. The systematic utilisation of Space, or, to put it another way, the systematic disposition of the pieces, is the most important factor in a game of chess and, within certain limits, even more important than Force, that is to say than a superiority in material. Often a win is obtained because one player forces a decisively better position by a sacrifice of material—a triumph of mind over matter. TIME Always make the best possible use of the right to move. You must not lose a single move. This Black would do, if, to give an absurd example, in reply to 1. P-—K4, Kt —QB3; 2. P —Q4 he were to play 2.... Kt-Ktl. He would thus have Jost two tempi. The fault is never quite as glaring as that in actual play, but is often very similar. It would be as bad if, instead of the Knight’s moves, Black played P-—QR3 and P-—KR8:. Actually then, there would have been no loss of tempo, since the two moves with the Rooks’ pawns are visible on the board, and have not vanished, are not lost as were the two Knight moves. However, for the purpose of the present phase of the game, for any real significance in the Opening, these pawn moves are as good as useless, and can therefore be written off as loss of tempo. That is to say, they do not contri- bute in any way to the development of the pieces, the real aim of the Opening. In the Opening every tempo must, whenever possible, be utilised for development, so that the essential pawns are moved with all speed, and the minor pieces devel- oped. At the same time every care must be taken not to develop one’s opponent, for by so doing one presents him with one or more tempi. Just as in respect of Force, and Space, so also in respect of Time, we must attempt to maintain a balance, and, whenever possible, to gain a superiority. To gain tempi 228 THE OPENING or to force one’s opponent to lose them is the ideal to be aimed at. A few examples will make clearer this point, over which some quite good players are occasionally uncertain. After 1.P—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. P-Q4, P xP (the Scotch Game); 4. Kt x P, the move 4.... Kt x Kt is analysed in some chess manuals. This move should never even come under consideration for it develops not Black but White, who, after 5. Q x Kt, hasasplendid game. Black, asa result of the faulty exchange of Knights, has actually presented him with a tempo. Let us count the moves in development which are visible on the board. There are three for White, the two pawn moves and the Queen move. On the other hand, Black has made but one move, that with his King’s pawn, and since it is his turn to play, he can make the second move in his development. But of the third, to which he was just as much entitled as White, he has deprived himself. After the moves 1. P —K4, P — Q4 (the Centre Counter Game); 2.PxP, QxP, it has always been pointed out that Black, after 3. Kt -QB3, loses a tempo. That is a quite mistaken conception. The true case is this. White has lost a tempo by 2. Px P, he has developed not his own game but his opponent’s, and has thus given him a tempo. (2. P x P although clearly a loss of tempo, is the best move, since there is no satisfactory guard for the attacked pawn. If we are forced to, we must naturally disregard principles.) But by 3. Kt -QB3, White regains the tempo he has lost, or rather given away, however only if the Queen goes to QR4. Then two tempi for each side are visible on the board. White has developed his King’s pawn and the Knight, Black his Queen’s pawn and Queen. Thus in respect of tempi the game is even. Matters are very different, however, if Black, as was once frequently done, plays his Queen back to Q1. The moves of the Queen to Q4 and back again to Q1 are just as much lost as were, in our earlier grotesque example, the moves Kt —-QB3, and Kt-—Ktl. The tempo reckoning after the withdrawal of the Queen to QI, is then—Black, on the second move, gained a tempo, but lost two on the third. He must therefore be one tempo behind White, and this is obvious from a glance at the board. Two developing moves are visible for White, one only for Black. It is a very good thing, from time to time at least, to balance an account of the tempi visible on the board. This tempi reckoning originated with Alapin and myself. To be sure THE OPENING 229 Alapin, as indeed is quite correct, included in his reckoning such moves as P —-QR4, whilst I include only the developing moves and ignore the others—a system which, in my opinion based on my experience, gives results of greater practical value. No. 332 shows yet another example of this striking of a balance of tempi, taken from a more advanced and more complicated position. White has: (1) Castled=1 tempo. (2) Developed his Queen =1 tempo (no matter to what square a Queen is developed, I always reckon her development as equal to one tempo, even if, as here, she could not have reached the position in less than two moves. If she stands on the first rank, no matter where, then she has been moved but not developed, and I reckon her Notes position as equal to no tempi HZ Y/ WY at all). (8) The Queen’s Rook ae Y, he le pg ' ay on a half-open file=1 tempo. 2 AW je aa ; (If there were a white pawn at YZ vay; G a Q3 or Q2, then I should ex- 4 y Yyy Yer GL clude the Rook from my count me A a R la wy Y; yy J yy as not developed. I include a dat: oa Rook as developed only if it has Y a Yj Yj some space on its file in which Yy,r GY to play.) (4) The Rook at KB1 R & B a LBs =ltempo. (5) The Bishop at Yi Yi E77] El y KR4=1 tempo. (No matter where a Bishop stands, or how many moves it must have made to reach that position, I assess its position at one tempo.) (6) The Knight at QB3 =1 tempo. (A Knight anywhere on the second or third rank equals one tempo, on the fourth or fifth equals two tempi, on the sixth or seventh equals three.) (7) The Knight at K6=three tempi. In this example I do not take the pawn moves into consideration at all, since they balance. Each player has moved his centre pawns. I never reckon as developing moves P -KB4 and P—KB5. In reply to this we can count for Black, for castling a tempo, the Queen, the two Bishops and the Knight each 1 tempo. The Rook at KKtl1 has been moved but not developed. Thus White has 9 tempi as against Black’s 5, giving him the colossal advantage of 4 tempi. In position No. 333 the tempi are equal. By playing 1. Q-B2, White commits a not uncommon mistake, for 230 THE OPENING by 1.... Kt -Kt5, Black compels his opponent to move once again the already developed Queen, and thus lose a tempo. After 2. Q-—K2, White has still two tempi as regards the de- velopment of his pieces, but Black also can count two moves (the Knight is at QKt5) and, since it is his turn to move, can develop a fresh piece. He therefore has one tempo more than White. By 2.... KtxB, ch he loses the tempo he has gained, y at he sacrifices it, for two pieces yay = \{ disappear from the board, of which one was worth two tempi, the other only one, so that after 3.QxKt, Kt-—B3, the tempi are again equal. But by exchanging the weaker Knight for the stronger Bishop, Black has gained a slight material or dynamic advantage. He has, as I often jokingly express it, won the “Minor Exchange’’.t The advantage in tempo that he gained with his first move has been transformed into an advantage in Force. Time has become Force. Such a balancing of the tempo account is often of value in that it enables a player to choose the stronger of two possible con- tinuations, as, for example, in the following game. The play was 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt—KB3; 3. Kt xP, P-Q3; 4. Kt-KB3, KtxP; 5.Q-K2, Q-K2 (for this variation of Petroffi’s Defence see p. 245); 6. P — Q3, Kt-—-KB3; 7.B-Kt5, QxQ, ch? (this gives the opponent a tempo, for it develops him); 8. BxQ, B-—K2; 9. Kt -B3, Kt —B3; 10. Castles (QR), P-KR3 (Black, who is already a tempo behind, ought to use this move for development). White has now two good moves at his disposal: (1) the good, simple, safe withdrawal of the Bishop to R4, which maintains the tension and avoids the exchange of the stronger Bishop for the Knight, and (2) Bx Kt, followed by Kt-—Q5. After 11.BxKt, Bx B, White has four tempi against two. (The second tempo Black lost when he played P -KR3 instead of developing.) By 12. Kt-—Q5, B-QI1 (practically forced), White gains still more tempi. Or better, after Kt —- Q5 he has 1 This expression is used several times in the remainder of the book. No. 333 THE OPENING 231 another tempo on the board, and compels Black to lose time by retreating his Bishop. After 12....B-—QI1, this is the tempo account. White has 5 tempi visible on the board (Castles, Bishop at K2, Knight at KB3, each counting one tempo, and Knight at Q5 counting as two). Black has but one tempo—the Knight at B3. The Bishop at Q1 is just as much developed as its neighbour at BI, that is to say, it is not developed at all. White has, therefore, an advantage of four tempi! Without a doubt this must be the better continuation. Analysis bears out this assumption. There follows 13. P —-Q4 (whereby White attains a gain not in time but in space—a freeing move for his Bishop). If 13....B-—K3, the play is 14. Kt — B4, with a further attack (the threat of a “fork’’). If instead, 13.... Kt -—K2?, there follows 14. KR—K1, and White has the far superior game. (If 14.... Kt x Kt?, then 15. B—Kt5, ch, K-B1; 16. R—K8, mate). The reckoning of the tempi has shown the right way. As you see, Time plays a very important part in chess. By good play tempi once gained are never lost, but rather are ultimately transformed into a gain in Space or Force. The principle of the indestructibility of matter applied to the chess board! (Time=Force). He who continually gains tempi, eventually wins the game. In the End-Game in particular, one single tempo is often the decisive factor—one player queens a pawn just as the opposing pawn reaches its seventh rank, These three factors of Force, Space and Time work together at every move. The whole art of the Opening consists in bringing into action pieces which are at first shut in, in freeing pieces by a veryfew pawn moves, and in getting them to favour- able positions and that as quickly as possible. Each tempo must be fully utilised for development, and one must advance one’s game. The men are best developed in order of value. First the pawns, or at least one pawn, then the minor and, finally, the major pieces. A game is usually already more or less developed when, after the necessary pawn moves, the minor pieces are out, and the player has castled, generally on the King’s side. At the same time, of course, notice must be taken of the opponent’s every attack and threat, and every mistake he makes must be utilised to the full. The ideal to be aimed at is attack with development or de- fence with development. Anexampleis 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 232 THE OPENING 2. Kt -KB3, Kt-QB3. That you must take advantage of any gross blunder (as, for example, 1. P—KB3?, P-K4; 2. P—KKt4??, Q-—R5, mate—the so-called ‘‘Fool’s Mate’’) is obvious. Naturally, in the pursuit of a methodical develop- ment, such opportunities must not be overlooked. Nor must the threats of your opponent. When it is your turn to move, the first question must always be ‘What is threatened?’’ These threats must be parried, even if they are as simple and unskilful as, for example, the so-called ‘“‘Scholar’s Mate’’: 1.P-K4, P—K4; 2. B- B4, B- B4; 3. Q-R5?, Kt —- QB3??; 4.QxBP, mate. A similar impression—that of an unskil- ful move —is produced on me after 1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3.B-—B4, Kt-—B3 by the attack 4. Kt—Kt5 which, after 4....P—Q4; 5.PxP, Kt-—QR4, ends in retreat and the loss of the initiative, as we shall see in the Two Knights’ Defence (p. 260). No premature attacks with insufficient development and at the cost of development! The second player, who, when it is his turn to move, is gener- ally a tempo behind, must be particularly careful to see that he neutralises that disadvantage each time by replying to each of his opponent’s moves with one of equal value which produces equality in Force, Space and Time. Remember, no inferior moves and no blocking moves for there lies the way to the treacherous slope which leads to defeat. A typical inferior move, against which not only Black but also White has to guard, is often, for example, P -QB3, which robs the Queen’s Knight of its best square (QB3) so that it can only laboriously be developed via Q2, where it is by no means as well posted as at QB3. There is slightly more justification for the move P —QB3 if one is quite sure that the pawn which is blocking the development of the Knight will soon be removed, e.g. by the move P(K4) x P(Q5) by the opponent and the reply P(B3) x P(Q4). Then the square QB3 will again be free for the Knight, as, for example, in the Giuoco Piano after 1.P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B - B4, B - B4; 4,.P—B3, Kt-—B3; 5.P-Q4, PxP; 6.PxP, B-Kt5, ch; 7. Kt — B3 (see p, 249). If, however, Black defends by 4.... Q —K2! and after 5. P-Q4 carefully avoids freeing White by the move P x P and, instead, plays his Bishop to Kt3, then White’s Queen’s Knight will seek a favourable square in vain. By the blocking move P - QB3 White has lost Time and Space. Very often too, a pawn at K3 is a blocking man, since it con- THE OPENING 233 demns the Queen’s Bishop to cramped inactivity from the very beginning. Actually all centre and Bishops’ pawns on their third ranks are blocking men, since they restrict the oppor- tunities of the pieces. In the Queen’s Gambit (after 1.P-—Q4, P-Q4; 2. P—QB4) Black really has only the choice between two blocking moves, 2.... P—QB3 and 2....P—K3. The second, however, shuts in the Queen’s Bishop only temporarily, for after 3. Kt —- QB3, then 3....P —QB4! forces White either to shut in his own Queen’s Bishop in the same way, by 4. P—K3!, or to free Black by the customary moves 4. BP xP, KP xP. Thus the justification of the blocking move 2....P—K3 lies in 3.... P — QB4. I consider Ponziani’s Opening a typically bad one. After the correct moves 1. P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3, the game is even. This is no longer the case, however, after 3. P-B3?. White has misused a tempo by making a blocking move, whilst Black, in reply, develops strongly by 3.... P— Q4!. Now comes the point of the move P —-QB3: White, and at his fourth move!, develops his Queen to R4. Sapienti sat! Black has not one but several ways in which he can extend further the advantage he has already gained (see p. 300). The Opening can of course be limited merely to the favourable development of the pieces, as for example in the Giuoco Piano. After 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. B- B4, B-B4; 4.P-Q3, Kt-B3; 5. Kt-—B3, P-Q3; 6. B—K3, B — Kt3 (this is the usual reply to B-K3. If White exchanges, then by RP xB Black opens the Rook’s file, and his pawns have become somewhat more concentrated towards the centre); 7.Q-Q2, B-K3; 8. B-Kt3, Q-Q2, both players have developed their pieces favourably, the game is even and symmetrical. But in the Opening we can combine with the development of the pieces, always the most important object to keep in view, the aim of gaining command of the centre, of occupying it with one or even more pawns. This is important, since the main struggle of the Opening and of the Middle Game, as long as there is no attack on a castled position, is fought out in the centre. Who has pawns in the centre is, in this struggle, ceteris paribus, the stronger. Formerly, the term pawn centre was understood to mean two pawns, at K4 and Q4. However, many decades ago now, I stated that it was a very real advant- 234 THE OPENING age to have even only one pawn in the centre. Therefore our first move is to advance a centre pawn, our King’s or Queen’s pawn, two squares. If our opponent does the same, we try to force him to exchange off his centre pawn, so that we alone maintain a pawn in the centre. Thus after 1.P—K4, P—K4 we (as White) endeavour, as soon as possible without dis- advantage to us, by playing P — Q4 to force our opponent to play KPxQP. Or, after 1. P-Q4, P-—Q4, then by P -QB4 or later (after playing P -K3) by P — K4 we try to induce him to play QP xP. But, after firmly establishing a pawn in the centre, it is faulty play to exchange it (unless, of course, one is forced to do so or gains some advantage thereby) for immedi- ately the entire hold on the centre is lost and the opponent, who maintains a pawn there, at once gains the upper hand. The exchange of the pawn means loss of Space for the player is limited to three ranks while his adversary commands four. The pawn in the centre occupies a strategic point on the boundary dividing the two camps. (This boundary, naturally, is between the fourth and fifth ranks). If this pawn is attacked by a pawn, then it must be defended by one. It must not be surrendered without a struggle. All those open- ings in which one player needlessly relinquishes the centre are to his opponent’s advantage. The capture of the centre is the aim of and measures the success of the preliminary skirmishes of the opening. If the defender is forced to give up the centre, then every possible attack follows almost of itself. If he suc- ceeds in maintaining the centre, then he makes it extra- ordinarily difficult for his opponent to carry out—or even begin —an attack. Therefore, the moves P(K4) x P(Q5) and P(Q4) x P(K5), if they are not forced, are nearly always bad. The configuration White pawn at K4 against Black pawn at Q3 or White pawn at Q4 against Black pawn at K3 is to White’s advantage. Equality can be restored (if at all) only if Black—by P — Q4 or P - KB4 in the first instance, by P —- K4 or P —- QB4 in the second—can neutralise his opponent’s centre pawn. Thus in the Centre Game after the moves 1. P—K4, P-—K4; 2. P-—Q4, P x P (this surrender of the centre is forced); 3.QxP, Kt-—QB3; 4.Q-K3 Black must systematically strive to play the move P —- Q4 and must not be satisfied with P-Q3. By P-Q4 he more than equalises the game, he obtains the better game and refutes the move 2. P —-Q4 which was premature. (It is not possible for White, without greater THE OPENING 235 disadvantage elsewhere, to gain command of the centre thus simply.) On p. 305 the refutation by 4.... Kt -KB3; 5. Kt -QB3, B—Ktd; 6. B—Q2, Castles; 7. Castles, R —K1!, followed by P — Q4! is demonstrated. Sometimes we may give up the centre in order to occupy it again immediately, as, for example, in the following and similar positions. In position No. 334 Black can play the forbidden move P x P and, after Px P by White, can continue with P—Q4 (not KtxKP? because of P-—Q5, followed by Q-Ré4, ch, win- No. 334 ning the Knight, a very fre- HZ i ela Z Y quently occurring combination!) 4 pie Sew a. Y, Ae and after P—K5 by playing at A ak LE Kt — K5 can regain a firm hold Y ae yy onthe centrewhich henowoccu-_ Y Yh Y pies with a pawn and a piece. “y A, . The following is another case Wd ; LE gg Vi where it is permissible to re- Yj Z; Z Yr linquish the command of the 4 ZG YY Zo & 3 centre by a pawn in order to yey occupy it with a piece. In the Hogue sme French Defence (1. P — K4, P-—-K3) after 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt-—QB3, Kt-—KB3; 4,.P-K5, KKt-Q2; 5. P-—B4, P—QB4 Steinitz was the first to give up the complete command of the pawn centre by playing 6. P x P, in order to occupy the strong point Q4 with a Knight. Very soon after, I developed this idea still further in that, after 1. P-K4, P—K3; 2. P-Q4, P—Q4; 3. Kt —- QBs, Kt —-KB3; 4. B—Kt5, B-K2; 5. P-K5, KKt - Q2; 6. Bx B, Q xB; 7. Q- Q2, Castles; 8. P-B4, P-QB4; 9. Kt — B3 (not P xP, in order to avoid advancing Black’s Knight, thus pre- senting him with a tempo), 9.... P—B3, I played 10. KP xP, and after 10....QxP simply guarded the King’s Bishop’s pawn by P—KKt3. Later on I played P x P and then tried to occupy the weak point K5 and the strong one Q4 with my Knights. Here the complete relinqvishing of the pawn centre is fully justified since weak points, ‘holes’, have developed at Black’s K4 and K3. In such a case it is very good to occupy the centre with pieces. Man: decades ago now, I successfully carried out this line of play i. several games. The first player must, therefore, strive to obtain and hold fast \\ m WS SS \ > ot =i 236 THE OPENING the attack or, at least, the initiative, which is his by right; the defender, accordingly, must exploit every opportunity for counter-attack. The atiack is, in itself, an advantage—to use a military expression, it dictates the plan of campaign to the opponent. The attack, however, must develop from a better position and against some weakness of the opponent, and the better position one must strive to obtain by better play and not, as in a gambit, by a gift from an opponent following the old convention of trying to maintain a superiority in material even at the cost of development and position. And, particu- larly as first player, never give up the birthright of attack for the mess of pottage of a pawn! Always keep the initiative for yourself and, therefore, whenever possible, decline gambits, with which always your opponent is seeking to trip you up or outwit you. As second player, it is permissible to offer a gambit in order to wrest the attack from your opponent. Sometimes it is absolutely essential to sacrifice a pawn in order not to neglect the strongest continuation. It is better to have a good position than a superiority in material. You may sometimes quite well be a pawn down in the Opening, but to be a pawn ahead at the cost of position and development is generally dangerous. These are, in essentials, the main principles of a straightfor- ward strategy, based on my own experience. Exceptions to these rules are frequent, and often one rule will conflict with another. Thus in the example on p. 230: It is disadvantageous to exchange a Bishop for a Knight. But after this exchange (11. Bx Kt) the move 12. Kt-—Q5 wins tempi. So, too, after 10... P~KR3; 11. B-R4, P—KKt4; 12. B—Kt3 Black has certainly loosened his King’s side but the Bishop is displaced and shut in. So the advantages and disadvantages of a move must be weighed against each other with a ‘“Certainly— but ...’’ and here judgment, matured by experience and study, plays a decisive part. It is also possible to adopt a totally different strategy. One can reverse almost all the yrinciples developed up to now and proclaim as correct the very opposite. One can place material advantage above everything else and say “I want to be a pawn ahead, then I will defend with care and tenacity and, if my tactics are good, I shi ll soon win”. One can say “No pawns in the centre for they can be attacked and I shall have to defend them. Rat’er shall my opponent have the pawn THE OPENING 237 centre and I will attack it’’. I, personally, consider all these doctrines to be heresy. To many—and this is a matter of temperament and character—rather than the direct attacking strategy, the reverse will appeal. As a matter of fact, in the last few years there has arisen a School that preaches the hold- ing back of the centre pawns. It is very significant that the strongest players—the present World’s Champion, Dr. Alek- hine, the former champions, Capablanca and Dr. Lasker, and also Bogoljubow—do not belong to this School. Quite a cen- tury ago this idea, now proclaimed as new, was tried in the ‘*Fianchetto’’, as it is called, but was soon dropped because the opponent’s centre pawns were too harassing. Supposing that the opponent also adopts the same petty and cowardly strategy and holds back his centre pawns, what then? Then there is no question of a struggle at all, since the two armies do not meet! Let the following absolutely horrible game, played in the Mahrisch-Ostrau tournament of 1923, serve as an example. The names of the players I will keep secret. 1. Kt-KB3, Kt-KB3; 2.P-B4, P-B4; 3. P-—KKt3, P—KKt3; 4.B-Kt2, B-Kt2; 5.Kt-B3, Kt-B3; 6. P—Q3, Castles; 7.B-—K3, P—Q3; 8.Q-Bl, R-K]; 9.P-KR3, B-Q2; 10.Castles, R-QBl1; 11. P-R3, P-QR3; 12.R-Ktl, R-Ktl; 13.P-QKt4, PxP; 14.PxP, P-—-QKt4; 15.PxP, PxP. After sixteen more moves this caricature of a game was abandoned as a draw. We now come to the various openings. Games have been divided into two types—‘“‘Open” and “Close”. Those be- ginning with 1. P—K4, P —- K4 have been called “open’’, those in which Black replies to 1.P-—K4 with P—K3, P-QB3, P—-QB4 or P-Q4 as “half-open” and the remainder as “elose”’. This division is quite erroneous. The opening 1,.P-—K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3.PxP, PxP, for example, is as open as possible. All games are “close” at first and sooner or later are opened by a pawn exchange that opens one or more lines. * The beginner who has studied enthusiastically with many repetitions and has assimilated the foregoing subject-matter can now—but only now—start to play games with other 238 THE OPENINGS people. He will already be superior to the majority of club- players. I expressly warn him against trying to learn by heart the following openings. A terrible thought! He must thoroughly assimilate the principles and then, when he has played a game, he should study the application of those prin- ciples to the particular opening adopted. Thus he will discover the inner significance of the various openings. This is the only correct way. Chess cannot be played from memory but only with judgment and combinative ability. Both can be practised and strengthened. xkkk* THE OPENING (6) THE VARIOUS OPENINGS If both players open by advancing the King’s pawn two squares, then development with attack by Kt-—KB3 is the most natural and most forceful continuation. From this move with the King’s Knight the liveliest games result. ¥ % PHILIDOR’S DEFENCE This opening is characterised by the moves 1. P—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, P—Q3. By the shutting in of his King’s Bishop Black gets a cramped game. The great French master, Philidor, proposed to free his position by replying to 3. P —- Q4 with 3....P—KB4 but that move is—as is usually the case in the Opening—too risky. Some years ago the American master, Hanham, attempted to bolster up this opening by playing, after 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, P-Q3, 3. P—Q4, the move 3.... Kt—Q2 and he found many followers. But this attempt also is not completely satisfactory. * 1. P~K4, P—~K4; 2. Kt -KB3, P - Q3: 3. P-Q4 Instead of this, B - QB4 or Kt — B3 can be played, but they are simple developing moves without any definite plan, while the pawn move systematically aims at the capture of the centre. Bo sess Px P? THE OPENINGS 239 This reply, at one time the most frequent, abandons the centre to the opponent without the slightest struggle and presents him with a tempo; it is, therefore, a double mistake. 3. .... B — Kt5 is also bad, for after 4. Px P, Bx Kt; 5.QxB,PxP White has won a tempo and has obtained an exchange favour- able to himself, so that Ke stands considerably better. 4.QxP The strongest move. Here the early development of the Queen is not disadvantageous since she can maintain this post. Kt x P is also good but is inferior to Q x P, since the advantage of a tempo in development is greater than that of one in position. er Kt — QB3- If 4.... B -Q2, then White develops his Queen’s Bishop at K3, B4 or Kt5 and after 5.... Kt -QB3 retreats his Queen to Q2. 5. B-QKtd B -—Q2 6. B x Kt Retreating the Queen would cost the tempo he has won. Go sexe BxB 7. Kt —- B38 Kt — B3 8. B — Ktd B -K2 9. Castles (QR) Castles Now Black threatens to win a pawn by a pseudo-sacrifice at his K5: 10....KtxP; 11. KtxKt, Bx Kt; 12.BxB, Q xB; 13.KR-—K1, P—KB4. This might easily be overlooked. 10. KR -Kl P-KR¢4 is, perhaps, even stronger. It guards the Bishop srainst the masked double attack. Alter 10. KR -—K1, however, White has the freer and much better game. He is splendidly developed, has captured the centre—and has thus obtained all that one can reasonably expect in the Opening. After 1.P-K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, P-Q3; mut in Svery R 240 THE OPENINGS Philidor’s attempt to free his position by playing 3....P—KB4 can be refuted in several ways. The simplest is: 4.KPxP P-—K5 5. Kt —Ktd BxP 6. Kt -QB3 Kt —-KB3 If Black guards his King’s pawn by P —-Q4, White attacks it again by P — B3. 7. P-B3 P-—Q4 If 7....PxP, then 8.QxP and White develops with attack. (If 8....BxP?, then 9.Q xP). 8.PxP BxP If 8....PxP?, then 9.B-QB4. If 8....KtxP, then 9. QKt x Kt, Px Kt; 10. B - QB4. 9. QKt x B Kt x Kt 10. Kt x Kt Px Kt The position is almost symmetrical but now Black suffers the evil consequences of having endangered his King by advancing his King’s Bishop’s pawn. ; 11. Q —R5, ch P—Kt3 If K —Q2, then the King’s pawn is won by either Q — B5, ch or Q — Kt4, ch. 12. Q —K5, ch K — Q2 If now Qx R?, then B— Ktd, ch wins the Queen. 13. P —- KKts3! With an overwhelming attack, as B-—R3,ch is threat- ened. For example, 13....K—Bl; 14. B—R3, ch, Kt — Q2; 15. B-Ktd, B-Q3; 16.BxQ, BxQ; 17.PxB, KxB; 18. Castles (QR) or R —QI1 and wins the Knight. A more complicated refutation of Philidor’s attempt (1. P — K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-—-KB3, P-Q3; 3.P-Q4, P—KB4) is the following: 4.QPxP BP xP 5. Kt —Ktd P—Q4 6. P—-K6 Kt —R3 -~B4, then 7. KtxKP (not Kt-—B7 because of THE OPENINGS 241 Q — B3), B — K2! (not P x Kt because of Q-—R5, ch followed by QxB); 8. Q-R5,ch (Q-Kt4 is also good), P—Kt3; 9. Q -K5, Kt -KB3; 10. Kt -Kt5 with advantage to White. 7. Kt -QB3 P -B3 8. KKt x KP P x Kt If 8....BxP, then 9.BxKt, PxB; 10. Q—R5, ch, K -Q2 (if B—~B2, then Q -—K5, ch); 11. Castles, Q-—K2; 12. Q -—K5, B-—Kt2 (if R—Ktl, then Kt —B6, ch); 13. Kt-B5, ch and White wins a piece. 9. Q — R5, ch P —-Kt3 10. Q -K5 R -Ktl 11. B-KKt5 B — Kt2 Or 11....Q-—Q3?; 12.R-Ql!, QxP; 13.B-QB4!, QxQ?; 14. R — Q8, mate. 12. P — K7! Q — Q2 13. Q — B4 Q - B4! If Black does not give up the piece but, instead, plays Kt — B4, then R — Q1 is decisive. 14.B x Kt B - K3! 15. Castles Q x Q, ch 16.BxQ B x Kt To save the King’s pawn. 17. B - KKt5! Threatening R — Q8, ch. ere Kt — Q2 18.PxB and White has the superior game. The move 3.@ P-—KB4 is also to be refuted by 4. Kt — B3 or 4. B—QB4. To refute Hanham’s variation (1.P —K4, P —K4; 2. Kt —- KB3, P-Q3; 3. P—Q4, Kt —Q2) is much more difficult because it is based on the sound principle that Black must maintain the centre, here his K4, in all circumstances. The move P(K4) x P(Q5) is nearly always bad for Black, not only here but in every R 242 THE OPENINGS opening. But in Hanham’s variation the maintenance of the centre is dearly bought, v1z. by the shutting in of both Bishops. Therefore, from a theoretical standpoint, it cannot be correct. For it is certainly a logical postulate that all pieces should be free to move, only then can a defence be completely satisfac- tory. In practical play, however, this variation gives Black the chance that his opponent may miss the correct way to an advantage and may go astray. After 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, P—Q3; 3. P—Q4, Kt —Q2 the best method of attack for White is: 4. B-QB4 P —-QB3 Forced. If 4....B-—K2, White wins by 5.PxP, PxP; 6. Q-Q5 or, if 5.... Kt x P, by 6. Kt x Kt, Px Kt; 7.Q-R5 —ain either case with a double attack on Black’s King’s Bishop’s and King’s pawns. 5. Castles Kt — B3 is also good but Castles is stronger. Diecs B-K2 5.... Q —B2 (instead of this natural developing move) is, per- haps, better. In reply, the strengthening of the pressure on the centre by 6. B—Q2 and 7. B-B3 is more lasting in effect than the attack 6. Kt -Kt5, Kt -R3; 7. P-QB3 followed by P - B4, 6.PxP PxP 7. Kt — Kt5 Kt —-R3 If 7.... Bx Kt, then 8. Q —R5, P -KKt3; 9. Q x B gives White the much better game. 8. Kt — K6! Px Kt 9.Bx Kt Kt — Kt3! If 9....P x B?, then 10.Q—R5, ch, K —-Bl; 11. Bx P,Q-KI]1; 12. Q x P, mate. 19. Q - R5, ch P-Kt3 10.... K — Q2 is out of the question because of 11. R — QI, ch, B-Q3; 12. Q-B7, ch, Q—K2; 13. BxP, ch, etc. Tf 10.... K - Bl, then'11. P — B4! and the attack, strengthened by the co-operation of White’s King’s Rook, prevails. This is the reason why 5. Castles is stronger than 5. Kt — B3. 11. Q-—K2 THE OPENINGS 243 and White has the superior position and development even though Black by playing Q — Q5? can win a pawn. Nimzowitsch has attempted to strengthen Hanham’s varia- tion by interpolating, after 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt —-KB3, P—Q3; 3. P—Q4, the move 3.... Kt—KB3, but this is re- futed by the author’s continuation 4.PxP!. There follows: 4,... Kt xP and then either (1) 5. B—QB¢4 or (2) 5.Q-Q5, Kt-B4; 6.B-—Kt5, B-K2; 7.PxP with advantage to White. PrtTrRoFrr’s DEFENCE Petroff’s Defence, brought about by the moves 1. P — K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-—KB3, leads to equality. It has often been thought that White by the best play can get a slight advantage against it, but this belief has invariably proved to be an illusion. White has a minimum of advantage, that of the first move. The most usual attack against Petrofi’s Defence (1. P — K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- KB3) is: 3. Kt xP P-—Q3 3.... Kt x P would be a mistake because after 4. Q—K2 the Knight could not move, for a discovered check would then win Black’s Queen, while other moves (e.g. 4....Q—K2) are also unfavourable to Black. 4, Kt -KB3 KtxP 5. P-Q4 5. P-Q3, Kt — K B3 leads to a symmetrical position and after 6. P—Q4, P—Q4 to the Exchange Variation of the French Defence (1. P-K4, P -K3)—see p. 314. Be oa. P-Q4 . Otherwise the shutting in of Black’s King’s Bishop gives him a cramped game. In the position now reached Black has an advantage of a tempo since his Knight is that much more developed than White’s. The whole play now turns on whether Black can succeed in maintaining his Knight at K5—and with it his present advantage—or not. In the latter case the 244 THE OPENINGS advantage in tempo and, eventually, also in position passes over to White. 6. B-—Q3 B — Q3! 7. Castles B—KKt5 8.R-K]l P—KB4 9,P-B4 Kt — Q2! Black prefers to sacrifice a pawn—and, indeed, must sacrifice it—rather than defend his Queen’s pawn by P —- B3. 10.PxP Castles In order, if White captures twice at his K4, to reply with B x Kt, breaking up White’s King’s side. 11. Kt — B3 QKt - B3 Black has a pawn less but a very satisfactory game. This system originated with the author, who first used it in 1906. The moves B —-Q3, B —-KKt5 and Castles can also be played in a different order. What is essential, however, is that Black should not shrink from making a pawn sacrifice if that be necessary either for the maintenance of the strong advanced post at his K5 or to obtain an attack. Marshall later on adopted this system on many occasions and nearly always with success. x The variation 8. P-B4, Castles; 9.PxP, P-—KB4; 10. Kt -B3, Kt-Q2; 11.P-KR3, B-R4; 12. KtxKt, PxkKt; 13.BxP, Kt-B3; 14. B-B5, K-—Rl; 15. Q-Kt3 also gives White no advantage. There follows 15.... Kt x P; 16. B-Kt5, B-K2; 17.BxB, KtxB; 18. B-K4, BxKt; 19.BxB, Kt -—B4 and White’s advantage is purely illusory. The Knight gets to Black’s Q5 and this dominating position for it is worth more than White’s extra pawn. An older system of development, also satisfactory for Black, is (after 1. P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -KB3; 3. Kt xP, P—Q3; 4. Kt-KB3, KtxP; 5.P-Q4, P-Q4; 6. B-Q3) 6.... Kt -QB3 with the usual continuation: 7. Castles B —-K2 8. R-K1 B-KKt5 P —KB4 is nearly always bad if it shuts in the Queen’s Bishop. THE OPENINGS 245 Here White would reply to it with 9.P~—B4 and get an advantage. 9.P-B3 Not good. 9. P—B4 at once is preferable, with the continua- tion 9.... Kt-—B3 (if 9....KtxQP?, then 10.BxKt, P xB; 11.QxKt, PxKt; 12.QxB and White wins a piece; also 9....BxKt; 10.Q~xB!, KtxQP; 11.Q-K3, Kt-—KB4; 12. Q — B4, Kt(B4) — Q3; 13. P x Pis good for White); 10. P x P, KKtxP; 11. Kt-—B3, Castles (Mot KtxP? because of Q —R4, ch); 12. B—-K4!, B-—K3! and the game is about even. 9.BxKt, PxB; 10.RxP, BxKt; 11.QxB, KtxP,; 12. Q —Q3, Kt —- K3 also gives an even game. Oren. P — B4! 10. P — B4 B ~ Rd! This excellent move refutes the artificial manceuvre of 9. P — B3 and 10.P-—B4. White has nothing better than simplification by 11.BxKt, QPxB; 12.P-Q5, Castles; 13. P x Kt, PxKt; 14.QxQ, QR x Q, after which Black has, if anything, the better game. As these complicated attacks by White were without suc- cess, there has been tried in recent years a very simple line of play, viz. (after 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt ~KB3; 3. KtxP, P—Q3; 4. Kt-KB3, KtxP) 5.Q-K2 with the usual continuation: Ds sets Q — K2 6. P-Q3 Kt —-KB3 7. B-Kt5 Even in this simple line of play Black has many difficulties to overcome—but they can be overcome. Above all, he must not be afraid of the “threatened” breaking-up of his King’s side by B x Kt; the possession of the two Bishops here, as so often, more than compensates for the disadvantage of the inferior pawn position. The King’s Bishop comes into good play at KR3. Now 7....QxQ,ch would develop White and thus lose a tempo. dete: Kt — B3! 8. Kt - B3 B-K3 246 THE OPENINGS 9, Castles Castles 10. P- Q4 P-Q4 11. Kt -K5 Q-Kl! By this move Black relieves the pressure. 12. Q-B3 Naturally, White could, instead, try 12.BxKt, PxB; 13. Kt x Kt, Q x Kt. | eee B-—K2 13. B-—Ktd Kt x Kt 14. P x Kt Kt — Q2 15. B x Kt, ch QxB 16.BxB QxB 17. Kt xP Q — B4 with complete equality. If, after 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-—KB3; 3. Kt x P, P—Q3; 4. Kt -KB3, Kt x P, Whitetries 5. Kt — B3, then: Dis touats Kt x Kt 6. QP x Kt B-K2 7. B—-Q3 Castles 8. Castles B — Ktd with an even game. After 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt —-KB3, Steinitz recommended the attack 3. P —Q4, which he considered to be a refutation of Petroff’s Defence. But against this attack also Black can obtain equality. He must, however, not make the move which is considered to be best, viz. 3....PxP. This move should never be made except when it is forced. After 3....P x P?; 4.P-K5, Kt -K5; 5.Q x P, P-Q4; 6.P xP, e.p., Kt xQP Black has made three of his six moves with the Knight—and this cannot be correct. He has a tempo less and nothing for it. White continues with 7. B-—Kt5, P ~KB3; 8.B—KB4, Kt-B3; 9. Q—Q2 and has the somewhat better game. He has it also after 7. Kt -B3, Kt -B3; 8. Q-KB4, THE OPENINGS 247 B-B4?; 9. B-Kt5!, B-K2; 10. Kt -Q4, B— Q2; 11. Kt x Kt. In any case Black cannot get equality by 3....P x P?. If, after 1. P—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -KB3; 3. P - Q4, Black plays 3.... Kt x P, then: 4,.B-Q3 P-Q4 5. Kt xP B-Q3 This position may also arise by transposition of moves, ¢.g. 3... P—Q4; 4. KtxP, KtxP; 5. B-Q3, B-Q3. 6. Castles Castles 7. P—-QB4 and Black is in great difficulties, which can, however, be over- come. The symmetrical move 7....P—QB4 leads to the loss of a pawn after 8. BPxP,PxP; 9.BxKt, Bx Kt; 10. Bx P, ch, followed by Q-R5, ch and QxB. If, instead, 7.... P— KB3, then 8.PxP, PxKt; 9. BxKt, Q-R5; 10.PxP, BxP; 11.P—-B4, BxBP; 12.BxB, RxB; 13.RxR, Q~xR; 14. Kt — B3 and White has the somewhat better development (Collijn). If 7.... P-QB3, then either 8. Kt -QB3, Kt x Kt; 9.PxKt or 8. Q-—B2, Kt-KB3; 9. B—Ktd and in either case White has the better position. I recommend here as Black’s best chance the counter-attack 7.... Kt — QB3!, with the following possible continuation: 8.PxP Kt x QP 9.Bx Kt Bx Kt Now White cannot make the pseudo-sacrifice at his KR7 since he would eventually lose the Exchange by Kt — B7. An alternative continuation is: 8. Kt x Kt P x Kt 9.P-—B5 B-K2 with about an even game. »¥ After 1. P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -KB3; 3. P- Q4, P — Q4 (see note to Black’s 5th move in the previous variation) White can continue the attack with 4. KP xP, instead of 4.KtxP. The continuation can be: 4. .... PxP 5. B-QB4 B — Kt5, ch 248 THE OPENINGS 6. P-—B3 Q — K2, ch 7.B-K2 PxP 8.PxP B -—QB4 9. Castles Castles 10. P — B4 R-KIl 11. B-—Q3 B-—KkKtd 12. B-Kt2 Kt —K5 and Black has a good game. Alternatively, after 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 2, Kt -KB3, Kt —KB3; 3. P-Q4, P-—Q4; 4. KP xP, P xP there is the possibility: 5. B — Kt5, ch P —B3 6. Q — K2, ch 6. P x P? would be a mistake and would cost a piece by 6.... Q —R4, ch; 7. Kt -B3, PxP!. 6. .... B-K2 7.PxP PxP 8. B-—Q3 Castles 9. Castles B-KKtd with an even game. Other attacks against Petroff’s Defence are innocuous. 3. Kt — B3 leads to the Three Knights’ and the answer 3. Kt — B3 to the Four Knights’ Game. Givoco Prano! This opening is characterised by the moves 1. P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.B-B4, B-B4. White may then simply content himself with the further development of his pieces without making any attempt to capture the centre. In this case the game is indeed very quiet, e.g.: 4. Kt - B3 Kt - B3 5. P-Q3 P-—Q3 6..B —-K3 B-Kt3 Not B x B (as Steinitz recommended), for that move opens the King’s Bishop’s file for the opponent’s Rook (see the section 1 Quiet game. THE OPENINGS 249 in the “Middle Game” dealing with the opening of the King’s Bishop’s file, p. 153). 7. Q -Q2 B -K3 8. B -Kt3 Q - Q2 9. Castles (QR) Castles (QR) with a completely symmetrical and even game. On the other hand, 7.... B — Kt5 gives rise to quite considerable activity. 8. Kt -KKt5 is not good because of 8.... B-KR4! followed by P—KR3. The correct play for White is the sacri- ficial combination: 8. Castles (QR)! Kt — Q5 9.Bx Kt BxB 10. Kt xB BxR 11. Kt — Bd B - Ktd 12. Kt x KtP, ch K — Q2 13. P —Q4 PxP 14.QxP with a strong attack for the Exchange he has sacrificed. Naturally, other methods of development are permissible. For example, both players—or only one—can castle on the King’s side. It is, however, inadvisable to play Castles (KR) too early since difficulties may then be caused by the pinning of one’s King’s Knight. It is very bad to prevent this pinning by P —-KR3, if one has already played Castles (KR) and one’s opponent has not, for he can then obtain a very powerful attack by P-KR3 followed by P-KKt4 and P-—Kt5 (see ‘*Middle Game’’, No. 252). After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. B — B4; B — B4, White, instead of simply continuing his development, can play 4. P-B3 in an attempt to capture the centre. The usual continuation is: 4... Kt — B3 P — Q3 is inconsequent and quite purposeless. Dicsies PxP 250 THE OPENINGS Black must now make this move—against which, as it gives up the centre, I always warn you. If 5.... B-—Kt3?, then 6. P xP, KKt x P?; 7. Q —Q5 wins a piece. 6.PxP 6. P — K5 is not so strong, for then Black—as is usual in such positions—has at his disposal the strong counter-thrust 6....P-—Q4!. After 7.B-—QKt5!, Kt —K5, Black has, if any- thing, the better game. 6. .... B — Kt5, ch It is obvious that this moving about with the Bishop is loss of time. 7. B-Q2 Safer than offering the King’s pawn by Kt — B3. y peer B xB, ch If 7....KtxKP, then 8.BxB, KtxB; 9.BxP, ch, K xB; 10. Q — Kt3, ch, P- Q4; 11.QxKt and White has the better game since he will occupy the weak point at Black’s K4 with a Knight. 8. QKt xB As a result of the exchange White has gained yet another tempo. SB coins P-Q4 By this move Black breaks up the centre and gets a strong point at his Q4 for a Knight. Nevertheless, the pseudo- sacrifice 8.... KtxKP, with the continuation 9. Kt x Kt, P-—Q4; 10. B-Q3!, PxKt; 11.BxP, B-—Q2, offers better chances of equality. 9.PxP KKt x P 10. Q — Kt3! QKt —- K2 The usual defence. 10.... Kt — R4 is considered to be inferior because of 11. Q—R4, ch, P—B3; 12. Bx Kt. 1]. Castles (KR) Castles 12. KR -K1 P —-QB3 White is two moves ahead in development and has an excellent game. It is only the strong position of the Knight at his Q4 that holds Black’s game together. Black has, however, not sufficiently appreciated the strong THE OPENINGS 251 threat of White’s 4. P-B3. White threatens to play P -Q4 and so force the bad move P x P (by which Black gives up the centre) and also by attacking the King’s Bishop (first by P — Q4, then by P x P and finally by B — Q2) to compel Black to lose tempi. By the defence hitherto most frequently played, 4.... Kt -B3, which I do not consider to be satisfactory, this threat, as we have seen, is not parried. Still worse is 4.... P —Q3 after which White by 5. P—Q4, P xP (forced, for, if B —Kt3, White by exchanging pawns and then Queens wins either the King’s pawn or the King’s Bishop’s); 6. PxP, B — Kt3 obtains the (for him advantageous) Normal Position of the Evans Gambit (see p. 253) except that he is not a pawn down and has not castled. The threat contained in the move 4, P -B3 is parried—and completely so—by the oldest defence, 4....Q-—K2, which I, therefore, consider to be the best. The result is a close game in which White gets no attack since Black maintains the centre and loses no tempi. 1. P-K4, P—-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B — B4, B - B4; 4,P-B3: Bi Q — K2! 5. P- Q4 B — Kt3! Not P x P whereupon White castles and has the better game. 6. Castles P—Q3 7. P—-QR4 Threatening to win a piece by 8.P-R5, BxRP (or 8.... KtxRP; 9.RxKt, BxR; 10.Q-—R4, ch); 9. P-Q85 fol- lowed by 10. Q-R4, ch—a line of play which frequently occurs in such positions. Ces P—-QR3 P — QR4 is not so good since it permits the posting of White’s Queen’s Knight at his QKt5. 8. B-K3 Threatening (e.g. after Kt -—B3) to create horrible doubled pawns by P x P followed by B x B. Sixes B-—R2 9. QKt — Q2 The Knight has to be thus badly posted since the Queen’s 252 THE OPENINGS Bishop’s pawn robs it of its best square. The ‘‘Knight’s Tour’, Kt -R3 and Kt — B2, offers few chances. O. deve Kt —B3 10. Q — B2 Castles White has no vestige of an attack. The game is even. After the moves 1. P~K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B-B4, B-B4; 4.P-B3, Q-K2; 5.P-Q4, B-Kt3 a recent innovation is the continuation 6. P—Q5, Kt —Ktl; 7. P-Q6 by which White offers an important pawn in order to hinder for some time the development of Black’s Queen’s Bishop. It is clear that after 7...QxP; 8.QxQ, PxQ Black’s game is seriously cramped. The question is whether this compensates White for the loss of such an important pawn. After 9. Kt —-R3 (as White played in the game in which this innovation was introduced) Black should develop with attack by 9....Kt-—KB3. (In the game the inferior P-QR3 was played.) To guard his King’s pawn White has nothing better than 10. B-Q5 and that is bad enough. (If 10. B-Q3?, then 10....P-—Q4 and White cannot play 11. Px P? because of ll....P-K5.) After 10....KtxB; 11.PxKt the de- velopment of Black’s Queen’s side pieces is still hindered but they can eventually get out, the Knight at once via QR3 to QB4 or QB2, and the Bishop (after the Queen’s Rook’s and Queen’s Knight’s pawns and the King’s Bishop have been moved) at QKt2. Since White has been forced to play 11. Px Kt Black’s extra pawn now is not a comparatively worthless one at his Q3 but a valuable and very strong one at his K4. In any case, this new gambit should be defended on these lines and should prove to be incorrect. The Max Lange Attack, which arises (after 1. P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. B — B4, B — B4) from the continuation 4. Castles, Kt -B3; 5. P-—-Q4, PxP; 6. P—K5, is dealt with in the Two Knights’ Defence (see p. 266). kkx«e THE OPENINGS 253 Evans GAMBIT The Evans Gambit is a variation of the Giuoco Piano which occurs when White (after 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt —-KB3, Kt—QB3; 3. B-—B4, B-—B4) makes the peculiar and in fact meaningless move 4. P-QKt4. Only if Black takes the pawn has the move any significance. Yor after 4....BxP White can make the move P — B3—so important in the Giuoco Piano —with the gain of a tempo, and then successfully establish centre pawns at his Q4 and K4. As a result White generally gets a very strong and harassing attack that more than com- pensates him for the sacrifice. This is particularly the case in the so-called ‘‘Normal Position’’ of the Evans Gambit which arises from the most frequently played but quite incorrect defence: 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. B - B4, B - B4; 4,.P-QKt4, BxP: 5. P-B3 B - B4? By this move Black loses yet another tempo since the Bishop is soon attacked by P—Q4. The retreat to R4 is much better. That such a mistake should have persisted for a whole century is due to the fact that formerly play was less guided by general principles. 6. Castles P—-Q3 7. P—Q4 Px P? Here the giving back of the pawn by 7.... B-Kt3; 8.PxP, PxP; 9.QxQ,ch, KtxQ (Lasker’s continuation), which leads to an approximately even game, is to be preferred. 8. PxP B -Kt3 In this, the ““Normal’’, position I consider that White has the better game. He has a very strong centre, a fine free game, and good chances of attack. Black’s extra pawn is no sufficient compensation. (Good development and position are always more valuable than equality in material, for in Chess mind very frequently triumphs over matter.) In the ‘‘Normal Position” one must, however, noé continue the attack according to the scheme that Anderssen adopted time and time again, viz. by 9. P—Q5?, a move that prematurely uses up the strength of the centre and closes the line of the King’s Bishop, but must 254 THE OPENINGS quietly continue one’s development by 9. Kt-B3. After 9.... Kt -QR4, the reply recognised as best, there follows: 10. B —-Ktd P—KB3 If Kt —K2, then Kt — Q5. 11. B- B4 KtxB 12. Q -Ré4, ch Q —-Q2 13. Q x Kt Q — B2 14. Kt —-Q5 with an excellent game for White. Tchigorin nearly always carried this line of play to a successful conclusion. Another usual and faulty line of play for Black is the so-called ‘“Compromised Defence’: 1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3.B-B4, B-B4; 4.P-QKt4, BxP; 5.P-B3, B-R4!; 6. P-—Q4, PxP?; 7. Castles, PxP?. There follows: 8. Q —Kt3 Q -B3 9.P-—K5 Q — Kt3 Naturally, the pawn cannot be captured (9.... Kt x P?) because of 10.R—-K1, P-—Q3; 11. Q-Kt5 or R4, ch, winning the Bishop. 10. Kt xP KKt — K2 11. B- Rs?! Anderssen regularly continued the attack with the much in- ferior move 11. Kt—K2. After 11....P—Kt4!; 12. B-Q3, Q-K3; 13.Q-Kt2, Kt-—Kt3; 14. Kt-B4, KtxKt; 15. B x Kt, P—QR3 Black has very good counter-chances. U3 962. Castles 12. QR -Ql and White’s powerful attack is worth more than two pawns. These defences do not pay attention to what is here—as so often—essential, the avoidance of the move P (K4)xP (Qo). That move gives up to White the centre and the freer game. The idea of avoiding that move is carried out in the defence THE OPENINGS 57 first suggested by Sanders and then developed by the gilso Russian theoretician Alapin. This defence I now give. J] the best in the Evans Gambit Accepted. 1. P-—K4, P- 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.B-B4, B-B4; 4. P-C BxP; 5. P—B3: ue Beaks B —- R4! 6. P —- Q4 P — Q3! 7. Castles 8 White’s last two moves can be played in the reverse order. L 7.PxP, then 7....Q-—K2. If 7.Q—Kt3, then Black must guard his King’s Bishop’s pawn by 7.... Q — Q2 (for, if Q —- K2 or KB3, then P —- Q5 followed by Q —R4 or Kt5, ch wins the Bishop). If 8.PxP, Black then offers the pawn by &8.... B — Kt3! and by the threat of Kt —-R4 obtains a good game. (If, instead, 8....PxP?, then 9. B-R3 followed by Castles and R — Q1 would give too strong an attack.) ee ee B - Q2! The two moves P — Q3 and B — Q2! comprise Sanders’ Defence. The object of the Bishop’s move is to guard the Queen’s Knight so that, if 8. Q—-Kt3, Q-—K2; 9.QxP?, not only is no piece lost but after 9... R-—Ktl; 10.Q-R6, R-Kt3 White’s Queen is almost lost. (Only by B x P, ch is she to be saved.) Above all, however, Black maintains the pawn at his K4 and White—the blocking one at his QB3! It is, therefore, very difficult for White to obtain an attack. 8. Q —- Kt3 Q —-K2 9.PxP PxP 10.R-QI] Threatening to win back the pawn by the pseudo-sacrifice 11.BxP,ch, QxB; 12.QxQ,ch, KxQ; 13. R~xB, ch— therefore, not a very terrible threat. 10. .... Castles! Black offers the King’s Bishop’s pawn and has then the better development and position. * By the following line of attack White can, at any rate, obtain equality against this strongest defence: 1. P—K4, P—K4; 254 } THE OPENINGS quie<t — KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. B- B4, B —- B4; 4. P- QKt4, B xP; 9....>-_B3, B—R4!; 6. Castles, P—Q3; 7. P-—Q4, B -—Q2!: 8. Px P! PxP 9. QKt — Q2! If Kt... iding to play to win the King’s pawn by B-Q5 and -B4, Rees Q -K2 »xP would not be good because of B xP, ch followed by Q — Kt3, ch. 10. B-Q5 Kt -— B3? 11. Kt — B4 B —Kt3 12. B-R3 B-QB4 13. BxB Q xB 14. QKt xP Castles (KR) with an even game. But the defence can be strengthened still further. Black must make the opportune counter to his opponent’s threat of playing Kt -—B4 and winning the King’s pawn. Therefore, after 9. QKt —-Q2, he should play (instead of Q-K2) B-Kt3; 10. B-Q5, KKt-—K2; 11. Kt-B4, P-B3. It is then very doubtful whether the attack is sufficient compensation for the pawn. In any case, the Sanders-Alapin variation is the type of a satisfactory defence. + The simplest defence is, naturally, to decline the gambit by 4....B-—Kt3. Black has then no difficulties; on the contrary, White may quite likely find himself in trouble caused by the purposeless loosening of his Queen’s side. After 1.P—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. B - B4, B-B4; 4. P- QKt4, B—Kt3 the usual continuation is: 5. P -QR4 P-QR3 6. Castles P—Q3 7.P-—R5 B-R2 8. P—Ktd After this move the isolated Queen’s Rook’s pawn may become weak. ee PxP 9.BxP Kt — K2 THE OPENINGS 257 Now Black is ahead in development. Naturally B — Q2 is also good. 10. P - Q4 PxP Black gives up the centre to win further tempi. He gains tume in exchange for space. 11. Kt xP Castles! Now Black threatens (e.g. after 12. B —- K3) to win the Queen’s Rook’s pawn by B x Kt followed by R x P. White must, there- fore, exchange at his QB6 and so lose time. 12. Kt x Kt P x Kt! Since here White’s passed pawn is not to be feared. In reply to 12.... Kt x Kt White could play 13. P-R6. 13. B—-Q3 P-KB4 14, Kt —-B3 P — Bod! and Black has a good game. Having once moved his Queen’s Knight’s pawn, White may, of course, attempt to make something out of it by advancing it still further. The game then becomes very complicated but Black should eventually gain the advantage. 1. P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B — B4, B - B4; 4.P—QKt4, B - Kt3: 5.P-Kt5 Kt — R4 6. Kt xP If 6. B—K2, then Black plays 6....P —Q4! with advantage. After the text-move, however, either a whole piece is lost or else two minor pieces for a Rook. On gsc Kt — R3! Now White is threatened with the loss of a piece by either P — Q3 or B — Q5 (which move would not be good before Kt — R3 because of the reply Kt x BP). 7,P-Q4 P-Q3 8. Bx Kt P xB! Not 8....P x Kt (which is considered to be the correct move), for after 9. Bx P, R—KKtl; 10.BxP, ch, K xB; 11.BxP White has four pawns for the piece, whereas after 8.... P x B! 8 258 THE OPENINGS he gets a Rook and two pawns for two minor pieces, which is normally a bad bargain in such an early stage of the game and here particularly so since Black’s pieces obtain good attacking positions. 9.BxP, ch In this very complicated position 9.Q-B3, 9.Q-R5 and 9. Kt x P have also to be considered. After 9.Q-B3 there follows 9.... Castles!; 10. KtxP (if BxP, ch, then K-—Kt2 and White loses a piece), Kt x B; 11.KtxQ, RxQ; 12.PxR, BxP; 13.P-B3, B-B3; 14. Kt x P, B x Kt with a clear advantage to Black. After 9.Q-R65 the play is 9.... Castles!; 10. Kt x P, Q — B3; 11. KtxQP, ch (if KtxRP,ch, then K—-—Kt2), KtxB; 12. Kt x Kt, QxP, ch; 138. K-QI, QxQP, ch and Black wins either the Rook or the Knight. After 9. Kt x P there follows 9....Q—B3; 10. Kt x R (or, once again, 10. Q — R5, Castles!; 11. Kt x RP, ch, K —Kt2), Kt x B; 11. P- QB3, B — K3, also with advantage to Black. eee K — K2 10. Kt — QB3! If Q-B3, then BxP and wins. The Knight’s move sets a fine trap. 1h | Beer P x Kt Threatening destruction by Kt—Q5, ch. If 11.... P- B32, then White wins by 12. P x P followed by Q — B6, ch. Eh ais B —- Ktd! This brilliant parry finally establishes Black’s advantage. After 12.QxB, K xB, as well as after 12. Kt—Q5, ch, Q x Kt; 13. Bx Q, Bx Q, Black is a piece ahead for only two pawns. This line of play seems to me to refute most forcibly and clearly the faulty attack 1.P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt —KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B - B4, B —- B4; 4. P - QKt4,'B — Kt3; 5. P — Kt5. Kt —R4; 6. Kt x P. ' Two Kniguts’ DEFENCE This opening occurs when Black in the Giuoco Piano, after 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B - B4, instead of simply developing by 3. .... B- B4, makes the very natural THE OPENINGS - 259 counter-attack, 3....Kt-—B3. This system of development is thoroughly to be recommended in very many openings— and also here. Admittedly White can attack Black’s KB2 by 4, Kt—Ktd, but this attack, undertaken with insufficient forces, soon ends in retreat and counter-attack, if Black sacri- fices a pawn. 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B -— B4, Kt — B3: 4, Kt —Ktd A typical example of a bungling move. White has developed two pieces and attacks with them, instead of further developing his game. Naturally, the attack soon passes over to Black— a proof that the move must be bad. For, if White consistently makes the best move, it is impossible for him to be driven after a few moves into the unworthy rdéle of defender. ree P-Q4 Now, however, Black cannot recapture the pawn without getting the somewhat inferior game, v7z.: re Kt x P? 6. P — Q4! Clearer than the very interesting sacrifice of the Knight by 6. Kt x BP, e.g. 6.... K x Kt; 7. Q —B3, ch, K —-K3; 8. Kt - B3, Kt — K2; 9. P — Q4, P — B3; 10. B - KKt5, P —- KR3; 11. B x Kt, BxB; 12. Castles (QR), R-B1l; 13.Q-K4, B-Kt4, ch; 14.K-—-Ktl, R-B5; 15.QxP, ch, K-B2; 16. Ktx Kt, PxKt; 17.BxP,ch, K—Bl; 18. B—Kt3 with three pawns and a strong attack for the piece. Ge seni B-K3! The only correct reply. After 6....B-—K2 or 6....P—-KR3 White can make the Knight sacrifice with much greater force. 6.... Kt x P is out of the question since the reply 7. P-QB3 wins a piece. 6....PxP is also very bad because of the elegant continuation 7. Castles!, B-K3; 8. R—K1, Q-Q2; 9. Kt x BP!, K x Kt (if Q x Kt, then Bx Kt); 10. Q —B3, ch, K -Kt3? Gf 10....K-—-K1, then 11.BxKt, or, if 10.... K —Ktl, then 11.R xB, QxR?; 12.Bx Kt); 11. R xB, ch!, QxR; 12. B—Q3, ch, followed by mate. 7.KtxB PxKt 8.PxP KtxP 9. Q —RB5, ch Kt — B2 or Kt3 260 THE OPENINGS White has somewhat of an advantage because of the weakness of Black’s King’s pawn. But after 1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. B-B4; Kt-B3; 4. Kt-Kt5, P-Q4; 5.PxP Black, instead of recapturing the pawn, plays a gambit by 6.... Kt —QR4 and for the pawn sacrificed obtains the attack and a good game. The main variations are: 6. B — Kt5, ch Better than 6. P —Q3 after which Black gets the better game by 6....P—-KR3; 7. Kt-KB3, P—K5; 8.Q-—K2, Kt xB; 9.PxKt, B-QB4 (B-K2 is also good); 10. KKt-—Q2, Castles; 11. Kt-—Kt3, B-Kt5; 12.Q-Bl, B-Kt5, ch! (to weaken White’s Q3, later to be occupied by Black’s Knight, and to deprive White’s Knight of the square QB3); 13. P — B3, B -K2. 6. .... P-—B3 tne ee PxP 8. B — K2! P-—-KR3 9. Kt -KB3 P-K5 10. Kt -K5 Q - B2 The continuation 10....Q-—Q5; 11.P—KB4, B-—QB4; 12. R —B1 also gives Black a good game, for after 12.... Q ~Q3; 13. P-B3, Kt-—Kt2; 14.Q-R4, Kt-Ql]; 15. P-—QKt4, B—-—Kt3; 16. Kt -R3, B-K3 White’s position is loosened on both wings and blocked in the centre. 11. P—Q4 B-Q3 Or, perhaps even better, 11.... P x P, e.p. 12. B-—Q2! The best move. After 12. P—KB4 Black gets a strong attack by either 12...PxP,e.p.; 13. Kt x P(B3), Kt-—Kt5 or 12.,.. Castles; 13. Castles, P—B4; 14. P-—B3, R-Ktl, fol- lowed by R - Ql] and Kt -B3. With the Bishop’s move White seeks to obtain the advantage by giving back the pawn, e.g. 12...BxKt; 13:PxB, QxP; 14. B—QB3 and White has the better game. | aes Kt ~ Kt2 13. Kt — B4 THE OPENINGS 261 If 13. B—- QB3, then 13.... Kt —- Q4. 13. .... BxP 14. B-K3 If 14. P—KKt3?, then 14.... Bx P. 14. .... B-B5 Black has won back the pawn and has a good position. ¥ After 1. P—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. B - B4, Kt -B3 White has in 4.P-Q3, 4. Kt-—B3 and 4.P-Q4 much better continuations than the premature attack by 4,.Kt-Kt5. 4.P-Q3 is naturally the simplest and safest move. Thereply 4.... B —B4 turns the game into the Giuoco Piano (see p. 248). If, instead, Black tries to obtain the freer game by 4.... P-Q4?, he endangers his King’s pawn and this has disadvantageous consequences, ¢.g.: 5.PxP Kt x P 6. Castles B —-KKtd5 If 6....B—K2, then 7.R-—-KI1, P-B3; 8. P—Q4 with the better game for White. 7.P—-KR3 B x Kt 7... B-R4 is an alternative. After 8. P—KKt4, B-Kt3; 9. R-K1 Black has to give up his King’s pawn but his game is not without chances since White’s King’s side is loosened. 8.QxB Kt — Q5 After 8.... Kt -B3 White’s advantage is clear. 9. Q - K4! This move, first recommended by the author, is an improve- ment on 9. Q — Q] (as given in the Handbuch). The continua- tion occurred in a game played by the author. If 9. Q x Kt, then Black exchanges Queens and wins by Kt x P. are Kt xP 10. B x Kt KtxR 11.BxP R —-QKtl 12. B — B6, ch K —K2 13. Q x P, mate. A comical ending. re 1 Handbuch des Schachspiels. 8th Edition by C. Schlechter. 262 THE OPENINGS After 1. P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B — B4, Kt-B3; 4. Kt-—B3 Black wins a tempo by the pseudo- sacrifice, 4.... Kt x P, e.g.: 5. Kt x Kt P —Q4 6. B — Q3! P x Kt The continuation 6,...P-—B4; 7. Kt -B3, P—K5; 8. B — Kt5, PxKt; 9.QxP is not good for Black. He has loosened his position by advancing the King’s Bishop’s pawn which now serves no useful purpose at KB4. 7.BxP B-Q3 In this position Black is obviously a tempo to the good since he has already advanced his Queen’s pawn. It follows, there- fore, that 4. Kt—B3 is theoretically not quite correct. In actual practice approximate equality is obtained by the continuation: 8. P-—Q4 PxP Or 8....KtxP; 9. KtxKt, PxKt; 10.QxP, Castles. 9. Bx Kt, ch PxB 10.QxP Castles White has the better pawn position, Black the two Bishops. After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B - B4, Kt — B3 the move 4. P —Q4 leads to much more complicated play. There follows: 4..... PxP! Forced, for, if 4....KtxQP, then White by 5. Bx P, ch, K xB; 6. KtxP, ch followed by 7.QxKt wins a pawn, while 4.... Kt x KP is not good because of the reply 5. P xP, threatening 6. Q —Q5. 5. Castles 5. P —-K5 is bad since after 5.... P—Q4; 6. B - QKt5, Kt -K5; 7. KtxP, B-Q2; 8. Kt-—Kt3, Q-—RS5!; 9. Castles, Castles! Black has considerably the better development. er Kt x P! THE OPENINGS .: 263 This move, probably the best and certainly the safest, leads to a good game for Black. 6. R-KIl P-—Q4 7.BxP! In conjunction with the next move a very pretty pseudo- sacrifice, although one that frequently occurs in such positions. peer QxB 8. Kt — B3 Q —- QR4! The best move. Q-—-QI, Q—KR4, Q —-KB4 and Q —-B5 have also been tried. 9. Kt x Kt B-K3 10. QKt — Kt5 If 10.KtxP?, then 10.... Castles!. If 10. B-—Kt5, then 10... P—KR3; 11. B-—R4, P—KKt4; 12.B-—Kt3 (if 12. Kt — B6, ch, then 12.... K - K2 and Black wins a piece), Castles and Black has maintained the pawn and has the better game. 10. .... Castles By this move Black obtains the better development. ll. KtxB Px Kt 12.RxP Contrary to the opinion expressed in most text-books, the game is by no means even. Black has somewhat of an ad- vantage. He is a tempo ahead and has the move, also he has an effective centre pawn as compared with White’s King’s Bishop’s pawn. On the other hand, White commands the only open file with his Rook (which will soon be assisted by the Queen) and, in addition, has the very definite threat of B-Kt5, not only advantageously developing himself but dangerously displacing Black’s Queen’s Rook. 12.... B-Q3 has recently been recommended, the contention being that 13. B—Kt5 would then be bad because of 13....QR-BI, threatening Rx Kt followed by QxB. This, however, is incorrect, since White can ignore the threat and develop his game by 14.Q-—K2, for 14....RxKt would be a mistake losing a piece, eg. 14....RxKt?; 15. R-—K8, ch, Kt-QI!; 16.RxR, R-B1 (if 16....QxB, then 17. QxR); 17.Q —Kt4, ch, K-—Ktl; 18.RxR, BxR; 19. BxKt and White is a Rook ahead. Of course, Black need not play 264 THE OPENINGS 14.... R x Kt but in any case White has excellently developed his game by B-—Kt5 and Q-K2. On this ground the move 12.... B—Q3 is to be condemned. Black can, however, play (instead of 12....B-—Q3) either (1) 12....Q-KB4; 13. Q-K2, P-KR3 (to prevent B — Kt5) followed by B-Q3 and P-KKt4, or (2) 12....Q-Q4, or (3) 12....B-—K2!. This last move is the most natural and the best. The fact that in the Gothenburg tournament of 1920 I lost—to Dr. Tartakower—a game in which I played it has brought it into discredit. The continuation was: 13. Kt -K5 I, in White’s place, would rather have caught up in develop- ment by 13.Q-K2, B-B3; 14. B-B4. 13. .... Kt x Kt 14.RxB R -— Q2 14.... KR—K1 is not good enough since White first guards his Kl by 15. B-—Q2. If, instead, 15. RxP?, then 15.... Kt — B6, ch, etc. 15.RxR KtxR 16. B — B4 R-KI 17. P-KR3 Now the Queen’s pawn is really attacked. I played 17.... Q—-KB4 to which White could not reply with 18.QxP because of 18....R—K5, winning a piece. He played 18. B —- Kt3 to which I replied with 18....Q—K5 with a quite satisfactory game. Admittedly the Bishop is stronger than the Knight but the latter will in a few moves be posted at Q4, where it is very strong. However, as an improvement on my 17....Q —KB4 I suggest 17....Q—-—Kt5, not only guarding the Queen’s pawn but attacking the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. It would not be good for White to guard that pawn (e.g. by P —QKt3)—better would be counter-attack by 18. Q-—Q3. This leads to great complications from which Black emerges with the somewhat better end-game, eg. 18....Q xP; 19. R-QI1, Kt-—B3; 20.Q-B5,ch, K-Ktl; 21. Q-B5, Q —-Kt3; 22.QxP, R-K8, ch; 23. K -R2,QxQ; 24.RxQ, K — B1 and, on account of his opponent’s isolated pawns, Black has somewhat of an advantage. We see from these variations that the move 12.... B-K2 is not refuted by 13. Kt —-K65 but THE OPENINGS 265 that Black obtains a good, one might well say the better, game. After 1. P-K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3. B - B4, Kt-B3; 4. P-Q4, PxP; 5.Castles, KtxP; 6. R-KI, P-Q4; 7.BxP,QxB; 8. Kt—B3, Q-QR4 White, perhaps, obtains a better game than in the previous variation by play- ing (instead of 9. Kt x Kt) 9. Rx Kt, ch. The move does not look good since the Rook is then in a peculiar and exposed position. But White wins back the dangerous gambit pawn, and Black’s advantage, although definite, is not as great as it appears: eee B-K3 10. Kt xP Castles Now White is in a far from enviable position. The pin is full of danger for him. 11. B-K3 B-KB4 The obvious attack 11.... B-QB4 leads to nothing for Black, since White also has a pinning move at his disposal, wiz. 12. Q-—R5!, after which the game is quickly equalised by 12... Bx Kt; 13.QxQ, KtxQ; 14.BxB. 14.... B-B4 does not give Black anything, for after 15. R — B4, B x P White can without danger capture the King’s Knight’s pawn. 12. R - B4 Kt x Kt 13. R x Kt B - B4 14. R — Q5! If 14.RxR,ch, then Black obtains some advantage by 14... RxR; 15.Q-B3, BxB; 16.PxB, BxP; 17.QxP, Q -Kt3; 18.QxP, QxP, ch; 19. K-Rl, R-K1. iC Pere B - Ks?! If 14....P —QB3, then White wins three pieces for his Queen by 15.RxKB. The variation 14...RxR; 15.Q~xR, B-QKt5; 16. Q xP is also good for White. 15. R xR, ch RxR and Black, with his two Bishops, has some advantage. 266 THE OPENINGS After 1.P-—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B — B4, Kt -—B3; 4. P-—Q4,P xP; 5. Castles Black may continue with 5... B-—B4 (instead of 5....KtxP!). The position thus reached may also result from the Giuoco Piano, the Scotch Game or the Centre Game. The moves 6.P—K5, P—Q4; 7. Px Kt, P xB lead to the very wild and complicated Max Lange Attack. To assess the respective chances is very diffi- cult and the [ast word on this attack has yet to be said. The usual continuation is: 8. R-KI1, ch B-K3 9. Kt —-Ktd Q — Q4! Not 9....QxP?, for then 10. KtxB, Px Kt; 11.Q-—R5, ch wins a@ piece. 10. Kt — QB3 Q — B4 11. QKt —-K4 B-KBI This is considered to be the best move. There follows: 12. Kt x BP! K x Kt 13. Kt — Kt5, ch K ~—Ktl 14, P-—-KKt4 and Black is exposed to violent attacks, eg. (1) 14.... Q x KtP, ch?; 15.QxQ, BxQ; 16. P-B7, mate; (2) 14.... Q x KBP?; 15.R x B, Q-QI; 16. Q — B3, Q — Q2; 17. R —K7!!, Q xR; 18. Q-Q5, ch, followed by mate, (3) 14.... Q —Kt3!; 15.RxB!, PxP; 16. Q-B3, B-Kt2; 17. Q—-Q5. To avoid the Max Lange Attack Steinitz recommended (after 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. B- B4, Kt —B3; 4. P—Q4, Px P; 5. Castles, B-B4; 6. P-—K5) the move 6....Kt—KKt5. The reply 7. P-—-KR3? leads to a loss, viz. 7.... KKtx KP; 8. Kt x Kt, Kt x Kt; 9. R-—K1 (one of the few examples of the pin along the King’s file not being fatal), P-Q3; 10.P-B4, P-Q6,ch; 11.K-R2 (if 11. B—K3, then 11....KtxB), Q—R5; 12.PxKt, B-B7; 13.R-Bl, ‘BxP; 14.BxP,ch, K-Q2!; 15.RxB, B —Kt5, ch, winning the Queen. The correct line is: 7. B-B4! P—-Q3 THE OPENINGS 267 To prevent 8. P—KR3, Kt-R3; 9. Bx Kt; but Black can, however, probably allow this breaking up of his King’s side and simply play 7.... Castles. 8.PxP BxP 9. R—-KI1, ch K —-Bl If 9....B-—K2; then 10. B-QKt5 and the Queen’s pawn is lost. It is very improbable that the extra pawn, although here it is certainly a strong centre one, is sufficient compensation to Black for his inability to castle. By 10. Q —Q2 (which, how- ever, allows Black, if he wish, to force the exchange of Queens by 10....B-—Kt5; 11.P-B3, PxP) followed by P-B3 White can get rid of the Queen’s pawn and obtain a rapid development. kkk Scotch GAME This opening is characterised by the moves 1. P~K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. P-Q4. It is bright and lively but at the cost of solidity. In this respect it is inferior to the Ruy Lopez and the Giuoco Piano. Nevertheless, it has always been considered as correct. But, according to my ideas, the move 3. P-—Q4 is dangerous. It would, of course, be delightfully simple if thus one could get the better game so early. For Black having nothing better than 3.... P x P, losing a tempo for development and giving up the centre, White after 4. Kt x P will have obtained all that I have laid down as the main object of any opening—the capture of the centre. But wt 1s by no means as simple as that. Black attacks the King’s pawn by 4.... Kt — B3! and now we see that White has expected too much. He cannot comfortably guard both his K4 and Q4 at once. The guard by 5. Kt —~QB3 is only temporary because of the reply 5....B—Kt5. Moves like 5. P-KB3 or 5. Q —- Q3 are horrid. The pin by 5. B-KKt8 leads after 5.... P—KR3! to an exchange favourable to Black. Thus there is nothing left but the guard by B -—Q3, after first exchanging Knights. But by this exchange White loses the tempo he has gained (as a result of 3....P xP; 4. Kt x P) since he exchanges a Knight which has made two moves for one whose position is worth only one tempo; in addition, he promotes the pawn at 268 THE OPENINGS Black’s QKt2 to QB3. And even this is not all. After 4.... Kt —B3; 5. Kt x Kt, KtP x Kt; 6.B — Q3, or after 4.... Kt — B3; 5. Kt -B3, B-Kt5; 5. Ktx Kt, KtP x Kt; 7. B-Q3 Black by P-—Qé4 attacks the pride of White’s position, his King’s awn. In making the best reply P x P White has to part with iis important King’s pawn while Black’s originally insignificant meen’s Knight’s pawn (now at QB3) on recapturing gets to and there plays the réle which is the right of every centre ‘wn: it represents an advantage in position. The pawn at has an importance entirely different from that of the pawn t QKt2 which White has in its stead. A centre pawn is an ‘attacking one, while a pawn on a flank is, until the end-game, lof value only for defence. I, therefore, consider that the attack ’of the Scotch Game is not quite correct, but I must, however, again emphasise that this estimate is arrived at by the con- sideration of very fine points and that, according to the general superficial opinion, the opening leads to an even game. The main line of play is therefore: 1.P—K4 P-—K4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt — QB3 3. P-—Q4 PxP 4.KtxP Kt — B3! 5. Kt -QB3 This position can also arise from the Four Knights’ Game (1.P-K4, P-K4; 2.Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. Kt-—B3, Kt — B3) by the continuation 4. P—-Q4, PxP; 5. Kt xP. Disiec B-—Ktd 6. Kt x Kt KtP x Kt 7.B-—-Q3 P -Q4! 8.PxP PxP By 8....Q-—K2,ch?; 9.Q-—K2 Black could bring about the exchange of Queens and an early draw. 9. Castles Castles As the development is in other respects equal, Black’s centre pawn gives him some advantage. The play proceeds along the following lines: 10. B-KKt5 P -—B3 11. Q-B3 rs B —-K2 Black’s last two moves are, naturally, the safest. 12. QR -Kl B-K3 THE OPENINGS 269 12.... P-KR3 would be a mistake for there would follow 13.BxP, PxB; 14.Q-—K3 with a double attack on the Bishop and the King’s Rook’s pawn. White would then capture the pawn and have a strong attack. After 12.... B—-K3 the game is approximately equal—but only approximately. In spite of his somewhat quicker development, White cannot make a beginning; he lacks targets for attack and, above all, he lacks a centre. Black, in my opinion, h the somewhat better chances because of his centre pawn which later on will advance in conjunction with his Queen’s Bishop’s* awn. The moves 10.... P—B3and 11.... B —-K2 are open to question. Black can guard his Queen’s pawn by 10.... B —K3, instead of the pawn move. Admittedly, White can then advance his King’s Bishop’s pawn to KB5 but this advance is double- edged. White’s King is somewhat exposed and the centre— especially the points K3 and K5—weakened, while the pawn at KB5 blocks the line of attack of the Bishop at Q3. After 10... B—-K3; 11.P-B4, R-K1; 12.P-B5, B-QBI1 (or B —-Q2); 13. Q- B3 (13. Bx Kt, Q xB; 14. Kt x P?, Q - Q5, ch loses the Knight), B —-Kt2 Black has quite a good game. The Bishop at Kt5 can very well be played later on to Q3 and K4. Now as to the timid move 11....B-—K2. Iconsider 12. B x Kt to be no very great threat, for after 12. Bx Kt, QB! (the Queen’s must certainly not remain on the board or mating attacks may arise); 13.QxQ, PxQ Black has in his two Bishops complete compensation for his broken pawn position. Therefore, I recommend—but in direct opposition to all other authorities—11....R —Ktl. The game can thus develop more or less on these lines: 10. B—-KKt5, B—K3; 11. Q-B3, R-Ktl; 12.BxKt, QxB; 13. QxQ, PxQ; 14. Kt-K2, B-Q3; 15. P-QKt3, P-—QB4; 16. Kt -Kt3, P-B5, and Black has a good attack on the Queen’s side, while his King’s side pawns, if ever attacked, can easily be guarded. After 1. P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P- Q4, | PxP; 4. Kt xP, Kt-B3; 5. Kt-QB3; B-—Kté; 6. Kt x Kt, ,KtPxKt White can play (instead of 7. B — Q3) 7. Q - Q4: 7.Q-—Q4 Q -K2 8. P—B3 P — BA! 9. Q — B2! Castles 270 THE OPENINGS 10. B —Q2 P —-Q4 11. Castles! P-Q5 12. Kt —Ktl B xB, ch 13. Kt xB B-K3 14. B —- B4 White has the better pawn position, but Black has attacking chances along the Queen’s Knight’s file whereas White has ae no attack. Black’s game is therefore to be pre- erred. After 1.P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3. P —- Q4, PxP; 4. KtxP, Kt-B3; 5. Kt -QB3, B-—Kt5; 6. Kt x Kt, KtPxKt; 7.B-—Q3, P-—Q4 to advance the King’s pawn (instead of exchanging it) is also not good for White: 8. P ~K5 Kt — Kt5 9. Castles B —- QB4 Another line of play, distinctly in accordance with the demands of the position, is 9.... Castles; 10. B-—-KB4, P-—B3!. Black has the better game for White is forced to exchange his in- correctly advanced King’s pawn. 10. B-KB4 10. P -KR3? leads to a catastrophe for White: 10.... Kt x KP!; 11. R-K1, Q-B3; 12. Q —K2, Castles!; 13. Q x Kt, Q x P, ch; 14.K-Rl!, Bx P!; 15. P xB, Q-—B6, ch; 16. K —-R2; B-Q3 and Black wins the Queen. 10. sc P —Kt4 11. B—Kt3 P—KR4 12. P—KR3 P—R5 13. B-—R2 Kt xB 14. K x Kt P —Ktd 15.PxP Q -— Kt4 and Black has a good attack. * White may exchange Knights on the 5th move, viz. 1.P —K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. P-Q4, PxP; 4. KtxP, Kt-B3; 5.KtxKt, KtPxKt, after which the advance of the King’s pawn produces difficult variations but Black eventu- ally gets the advantage: 6. P —- K5? Q — K2! THE OPENINGS 271 Steinitz condemned this move and played 6.... Kt —K5; 7. Q —-B3, Kt -Kt4; 8. Q-KKt3, Kt -K3. I, however, think that after this Knight’s Tour (out of eight moves four with the Knight!) White’s game is to be preferred. There follows: 9. B-Q3, P-B3; 10.Q-R4!, threatening Q-—R5, ch, and White has the better game. If 6.... Kt -Q4, then 7. B- Q3, B- B4; 8. Q-—Kt4 and White has a good game. 7.Q-K2 Kt -Q4 8. Kt — Q2! 8. P -QB4, which was formerly played in this position, is bad for White because of 8....B-—R3; 9. P-—B4, Q-—Kt5, ch; 10.K-QI1! (if Q-Q2?, then Kt x P!), B-—B4!. There may follow: 11.P-QR3, Q-Kt6,ch; 12.Q-—B2, Kt —K6, ch; 13. Bx Kt, QxB; 14. Q-Q2, P —Q3!; 15. P x P, Castles (QR) and Black has the far superior game. Bes ives B —- Kt2! 9. Kt —-Kt3 Castles! In order to start an attack by R-K1. 10. P - QB4 Kt — Kt3 11. B-Q2 R-K1 12. P —- B4 P-B3 and Black has the superiority in the centre. The attack by 13. P—-QR4 will be beaten off by 13....B-—R3!; 14. Q —K4, Q -—B2!; 15. P—-QB5, BxB; 16.PxKt, RPxP; 17. P-—R5, P-—QKt4. All these variations are exceptionally trenchant and lively. When White’s King’s pawn is attacked by P —Q4, another possibility for him is to guard it by Q-—K2, instead of ex- changing or advancing it. But after 1.P-—-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P-Q4, Px P; 4. KtxP, Kt — B3; 5. Kt x Kt, KtP x Kt; 6. B- Q3, P-Q4; 7. Q-—K2 Black has two good continuations, viz. : (1) ‘a PxP 8.BxP Kt xB 9. Q x Kt, ch Q —-K2 10. Q x Q, ch 272 THE OPENINGS If 10. Kt —B3, then 10.... B-B4. 10...... BxQ In this completely open position Black, with his two Bishops, has somewhat of an advantage, in spite of his isolated pawns. (2) {aoere B -K2 8. Castles Castles 9.B-KB4 R-Kl and Black has a good game. While the counter-attack 4.... Kt -B3!, in my opinion, actually refutes the Scotch Game, the older defence 4.... B —- B4 is good enough but allows White the chance of equalising. 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.P-Q4, PxP; 4, Kt xP: fists B-B4 5. B-K3 Q -— B3 White is now, thus early, forced to play 6. P-QB3, thus losing a tempo for development and depriving his Queen’s Knight of its best square. 6. P -QB3 KKt — K2 Black now threatens to get a strong development by P ~ Q4. 7. B-QKt5 This, L. Paulsen’s move, is the best and leads to approximate equality. 7.B-—K2 is inferior—there follows 7.... P —Q4; 8.B-B3, Bx Kt; 9.PxB, PxP; 10.BxP, B—B4, and, as Black has the better development, the isolated Queen’s pawn is an element of weakness. Black has also the better game after 7.B-QB4, Kt-—K4; 8. B-K2, Q-Kt3; 9. Castles, P-Q4!. If 7.Q —Q2 (preparatory to the attack by Kt — Kt5), then 7....P—Q4!; 8. Kt—Kt5, Bx B; 9.QxB, Castles and, if White captures the Bishop’s pawn, Black obtains a strong attack. Finally, 7.Kt-B2, P-Q3!; 8. BxB, PxB,; 9. Kt-K3, B—K3; 10. Kt-—Q2, Castles (QR) is good for Black. Tews Castles 8. Castles THE OPENINGS 273 The immediate exchange of Knights leads to the same position, eee P —Q3 9. Kt x Kt White has nothing better since he cannot develop his Queen’s Knight at Q2 without losing a pawn after exchanges at his Q4. 9. .... Px Kt 10.BxB BP xB 11. B—Q4 Q — Kt3 Black has the initiative but otherwise the game is approxi- mately even. The strong King’s pawn will be neutralised by P —KB4., The clever and exceptionally piquant Blumenfeld Attack, which (after 1.P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt -—QB3; 3. P—-Q4, PxP; 4. KtxP, B-—B4; 5. B-K3, Q—-B3) arises from the move 6. Kt — Kt5 (instead of 6. P -QB3), deserves special discussion. There follows: 6...BxB; 7.PxB, Q-—R5,ch; 8.P-Kt3, QxKP!; 9.KtxP,ch, K-QI; 10.KtxR, QxR; 11.Q-Q6 (threatening Q-B8, mate), Kt-B3; 12. Kt -Q2 (to prevent Q-—B6. A comical line here would be 12. Q —B7, ch?, K —K2; 13. Kt —-Q2?, Kt —-Q4 —and White’s Queen is lost!), Kt-KI1!; 138. Q-—B4, Q-Q4; 14. Castles (to B — B4 the reply would also be Q —K4), Q-—K4 (Black seeks to exchange Queens in order afterwards to effect the capture of the imprisoned Knight); 15.Q~xP (other moves, e.g. Q — B3, are hardly better; Black has more or less as much attack as White, viz. along the King’s file after Kt-—Q3 or B3. Also White’s imprisoned Knight must eventually be lost—even if after some little while), Q x KP; 16. K —-Ktl, Q ~K2 and Black will get the advantage. But he must not move his Queen’s pawn. Another refutation of the Blumenfeld Attack, given by Colliin and Lasker, is as follows: 1.P—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. P—Q4, PxP; 4. KtxP, B-B4; 5. B-K3, Q-—B3; 6. Kt—Kt5, BxB; 7.PxB, Q-RS5, ch; 8. P—Kt3, Q-Q1. In other words—Black plays Q —B3 in order, after Kt —-Kt5, to play the Queen (after two inter- mediate moves) back again to QI!. This loss of two tempi cannot possibly be correct, let alone a refutation. Collijn and Lasker continue the attack with 9. Q-—Kt4, but this attack T 274 THE OPENINGS appears to be much stronger than it really is and is beaten off by 9...K-Bl!; 10.Q-B4, P-Q3; 11.B-—B4, Kt -—K4; 12. Castles, Kt-KB3; 13.B-—Kt3, B-—R6, followed by P~—KR4. Much more harassing is 9. QKt — B3, threatening Kt — Q5 with an attack on the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. The continuation is on these lines: (1) 9.... Kt-B3; 10. Kt — Q5, KtxKt; 11.PxKt, P—QR3 (if Kt-—K4, then P-—Q6)); 12. Kt — B3 (or Kt —-Q4), Kt -K4; 13. P—Q6 and White has a good game; or (2) 9....P-QR3; 10. Kt-—Q4, Kt —K4 (in order to maintain this strong point with the Knight); 11. Kt -B3 (or B—Kt2, followed by Q-K2 and castling on the Queen’s side) and after either 11....Q-—B3; 12. Kt x Kt, Q x Kt; 13. Q-Q4, or 11.... Kt x Kt, ch; 12.Q x Kt, P-Q3; 13. Castles White maintains an advantage in development and open files for his Rooks—which factors at least compensate him for his inferior pawn formation. The defence 4....Q—R5—at one time frequently played, particularly by Steinitz—is, in my opinion, not even worthy of consideration for it cannot possibly be the right strategy to bring the Queen—without necessity or clear advantage— thus early into the game. White offers his King’s pawn by 5 Kt —Kt5 or Kt - KB3 and obtains a violent attack. ScotcH GAMBIT This arises when after the moves 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt --QB3; 3. P-—Q4, Px P White does not re- capture but offers the pawn in the interests of quicker develop- ment and attack. The attack, however, does not compensate him for the missing pawn for he has an insufficient advantage in development—an advantage of three tempi is needed to justify a gambit. White can continue with 4. B-QB4 or 4.P-—B3 (Goring Gambit). The following are the main variations: 1.P~K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P-Q4, P xP: 4,B-QB4 B-—B4 Here Black may make the counter-attack 4....Kt—B3. It leads to the Two Knights’ Defence under which opening it is THE OPENINGS 275 discussed in detail (see p. 262). The variation 4.... B —Kt5, ch; 5. P-B3, PxP; 6. Castles!, PxP; 7. BxP would be very risky as White would obtain a very violent attack. 5. Castles Vizthum’s Attack, 5. Kt-—Kt5, is premature and without force. After 5.... Kt —-R3; 6. Kt x BP, Kt x Kt; 7. B x Kt,ch, KxB; 8.Q-R5,ch, P-Kt3; 9.QxB White regains his pawn but after 9....P-—Q3 or, even stronger, 9.... P-Q4!, loses the attack. (If, after 9....P —Q4, White plays 10. PP, then 10....R—-—Kl1,ch; 11. K-Ql, R-K4.) The continua- tion of Vizthum’s Attack with 6. Q — Rd (instead of 6. Kt x BP) is also bad for White: 6....Q—K2!; 7. Castles, P-Q3; 8. P-KR3 (to prevent B-KKt5), B-—Q2; 9. P — B4, Castles (QR). De-sics P — Q3 6. P—B3 B —-KKtd The usual line of play by which Black offers back the pawn for a counter-attack. If he wishes to maintain the pawn, then 6....Q—-—B3 is the appropriate move, with the possible con- tinuation: 7. B—- KKt5, Q — Kt3; 8. Px P, Kt x P!; 9.Kt x Kt, QxB. On the other hand, 6.... P x P, which develops White and makes him a present of a tempo, is less recommendable, as White’s chances of attack are thereby increased. 7. Q—Kt3 Bx Kt 8. BxP, ch K -Bl 9. Bx Kt If at once 9.PxB, then 9....Kt-—B3; 10. B-Q5, Q-BI; 11. B~K6, Q-—K1; 12. B-B5, B-Kt3, followed by Q - R4, with the better game for Black. O..3% RxB 10.PxB P-KKt4 Instead of this peculiar—but very strong—move, 9.... Q- Q2 may be played and Black has then the far better development. On account of the strong hostile pawn at his Q4, White cannot comfortably develop his minor pieces. This line of play, which is good for Black, White can avoid by playing (instead of 5. Castles) 5.P-B3! Black must then either transpose into the Giuoco Piano (where this continuation is discussed—see p. 249) by 5.... Kt — B3 (followed, if 6. P x P, 276 THE OPENINGS by 6.... B—Kt5, ch, or if 6. P~K5, by 6.... P—Q4!) or give up the pawn by 65.... P-Q6, after which move, however, he has quite a good game since White cannot develop his Queen’s Knight at QB3. On the other hand, 5.... P x P? would be bad for Black as after 6.BxP, ch, K xB; 7.Q-Q5, ch, K-Bl (7... K-K1?; 8.Q-—R5, ch, P—Kt3; 9.Q~xB is still worse for Black); 8. QxB, ch, P—Q3; 9. Qx BP White has won back his pawn and has the better game. GORING GAMBIT This is a variation of the Scotch Gambit. After 1. P—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3.P-—Q4, PxP White plays (instead of 4. Ktx Por 4. B-QB4) 4. P-B3: 4. 0... PxP Black can, instead, decline the gambit by playing P -Q4— see p. 277. 5. B —-QB4 Kt — B3 The capture of the third pawn is not advisable. It is much better to have a good position than a superiority in material. 6. Kt x P Or 6. Castles, P—Q3. White then has (in addition to the initial advantage of the move) one tempo more, and that is too little. Black gets castled (if 7. Kt -Kt5, then 7.... Kt-K4 followed by P—KR3; or, if 7.Q-—Kt3, then 7.... Q—Q2; 8. Kt — Kt5, Kt — Q1) and White cannot sufficiently strengthen his attack. Ors. B —Ktd5 In order not to shut in the Bishop. 7. Castles Castles! Here B x Kt would not be good since White’s Queen’s Bishop would get to QR3, ¢.g.7.... B x Kt?; 8. P x B, P — Q3; 9. P — K5!, PxP (if 9....KtxP, then 10. Ktx Kt, Px Kt; 11. Q-Kt3, Castles; 12. B -R3 and White wins the Exchange); 10. Q — R4, Castles; 11.B—-R3, R-—K1; 12. QR —-QI, B — Q2; 13. Kt — Ktd and White wins. 8. P—K5 THE OPENINGS 277 No stronger attack is apparent. 8. .... B x Kt 9.PxB P — Q4! 9....Kt—K5 would be a mistake since after 10. Q—Q85!, Kt xQBP; 11. Q-Q3 the Knight would be driven to a bad post at QR5 and of this White would take advantage by 12. Kt -Kt5, P—-KKt3; 13. Kt x BP!, Rx Kt; 14. B xR, ch, K xB; 15. Q — B4, ch, followed by Q x Kt(R4). 10. P x Kt. Or 10.B-Kt3, Kt-K5; 11.QxP, QxQ; 12.BxQ, Kt x QBP and Black maintains the pawn with a good game. 10. .... PxB 11.PxP KxP and White has only faint drawing chances. Gortina GamBit DECLINED This leads to an approximately even game, but Black obtains at least the advantage of the first move. 1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. P-Q4, P xP; 4, P — B3: ee P—Q4 This move is always a very strong reply to P - QB3 since when, after KP x P, Black plays Q x P, the Queen cannot be immedi- ately attacked by Kt — QB3. 5. KP xP White has nothing better than this exchange which develops Black and thus makes him a present of a tempo. Black thus obtains the advantage of the first move. Bites QxP That the pawn is isolated is here of greater importance since Black is somewhat ahead in development and the pawn thus becomes a welcome target for attack. Govasec B-Kt5 278 THE OPENINGS A frequently occurring—but faulty—combination is 7. Kt ~B3 with the continuation: 7...BxKt!; 8. KtxQ; BxQ; 9. Kt x P, ch, K-Q2; 10. KtxR, B-—Ktéd or R4 and White has won the Exchange. As, however, the Knight has no retreat and is eventually captured, White has lost two minor pieces for Rook and pawn, which is a bad bargain. Ticks Kt — B3 7... Bx Kt?; 8. BxB, QxQP?; 9.BxKt, ch—and White wins the Queen. This is a faulty combination which may quite easily occur. 8. Kt — B3 Q - QR4 8.... B —Kt5 is not so good since after 9. Castles Black must either play KB x Kt (whereupon White, with his strong centre pawn and his two Bishops, will have a good game) or must move his Queen away again. 8....Q—KRé4 is, perhaps, even stronger than 8....Q -QR4. The likely continuation would lead to an almost forced—but very strong—sacrifice, »1z. 9. Castles (B — K3 is better), B — Q3; 10. P—KR3, Castles (QR)!; 11.P xB, KtxKtP; 12.R-K1 Gif P-—KKt3, then Q-R6), B-R7,ch; 13.K-Bl1 (if 13. Kt x B?, then 13....Q x Kt, ch; 14. K - Bl, Q —-R8, mate), B — K4! (threatening 14....Q—R8, ch; 15. Kt —-Ktl, Kt — R7, mate) with a decisive attack. 9.B-K3 B -Q3 10. Castles Castles (KR) The game is even but Black has still maintained the advantage of the move. Ruy Lopzrz This opening is characterised by the moves 1]. P —- K4, P — K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3. B—Kt5. It is the logical continua- tion of the attack on Black’s King’s pawn and is the strongest and most solid line of play in the King’s Knight’s Opening. There are ‘two good defences, viz.3.... Kt-B3 and 3.... P—-QR3; 4. B—R4, Kt — B3. The most natural line for Black is, as so often, the defence with the two Knights, 3.... Kt - B3, known as the Berlin Defence. The strongest line of attack is (as also after 3.... P-QR3; THE OPENINGS 79 4, B-—R4, Kt -B3) the move Castles. After 4. Castles there follows: , ee Kt x P! 4.... B — K2 is not so good as Black is afterwards forced to shut in his King’s Bishop by 5....P—-Q3 and so gets a cramped game. All lines of play which lead to the imprisonment of a Bishop are on principle to be condemned / 5. P- Q4 5. R-K1, Kt -Q3; 6. Kt x P, B — K2 leads to a simple game. 5 re Kt — Q3 A very simple defence that rapidly produces equality. It is, admittedly, against Theory, which condemns a Knight’s Tour in the Opening, but here the second move with the Knight is as good as forced and the third is played with an attack on a Bishop which is then best exchanged for the Queen’s Knight. On this ground the Knight’s Tour is here—as an exceptional case—justified. 6. Bx Kt QP xB 7.PxP Kt — B4 8.Q x Q, ch If 8.Q-K2, then 8....Kt-—Q5!; 9. KtxKt, Qx Kt; 10. Kt — B38, B - QKt5 with a good game for Black. 8... KxQ The play has brought about an end-game in which the chances are approximately equal. White’s King’s pawn is not well placed, and Black’s two Bishops ensure him a good game. In actual play Black has almost always won or drawn. ‘After 1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B - Kt, Kt —B3; 4. Castles, Kt xP; 5. P-—Q4 a natural move for Black is 5.....B-—K2. The usual continuation is: 6. Q —-K2 Kt — Q3 7.Bx Kt KtP xB Unusual, but, perhaps, playable, is the natural move 7.... QPxB. Admittedly, Black loses a pawn, but he obtains some attack, eg. 8.PxP, Kt-B4; 9.R-Ql, B-Q2; 280 THE OPENINGS 10.P—-K6, PxP; 11.Kt-K5, B-Q3; 12. Q-R85, ch, P-—Kt3; 13. KtxKtP, Kt-Kt2; 14.Q-R6, Kt-B4; 15. Q-R3, R-KKtl; 16.Q xP, R-Kt2; 17. Q -RB5, Q -B3, 18. Kt -K5, ch, K-K2; 19. Kt-Kt4!l, Q-R5!; 20.QxQ, KtxQ; 21.P-KR3, P-—K4; 22.P-—KB3, B- B4, ch, fol- lowed by Bx Kt and R-Rl. It is not certain that the attack is sufficient compensation for the pawn. 8.PxP Kt — Kt2 8.... Kt —- B4 is bad because of 9. Q —-K4, P—Kt3; 10. Kt — Q4 with the better game for White. 9. Kt —-B3 Castles 10. R-K1! Kt — B4 11. Kt —-Q4 Kt —K3 12. B-~K3 Kt x Kt 13. B x Kt P —~QB4! Not 13.... P—Q4 because of 14. Kt -R4! with command of the weak point at Black’s QB4 where a white piece will be established. 14. B-K3 P-—Q4 15. P x P, e.p. BxP Now Black has a bad pawn position but two formidable Bishops. 16. Kt — K4! B - Kt2! In order to have a winning reply to 17. Kt x P in 17.... B x Kt; 18. Bx B, Q -Kt4. 17. Kt xB P x Kt 18. QR - Ql Q -B3 with an approximately even game. After 1. P —K4, P —-K4; 2. Kt - KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. B — Kt5, Kt — B3 there are, in addition to 4. Castles, the moves 4. P — Q4, 4, P—Q3 and 4. Kt — B3 to be taken into consideration. 4,P-Q4 Kt x KP! As is so frequently the case, 4.... P x P, the usual move, is bad. After 5.Castles, B -K2; 6. Kt x P!, Castles; 7. Kt -QB3 White has the better game. 5. Q-K2 THE OPENINGS 281 If 5.P xP, then 5.... P—Q4! with aneven game. If 5. Castles, then 5.... B — K2 leads into the previous variation. If 5.P -—Q5 then 5.... Kt—Q3; 6. Kt—B3!, and the continuation 6.... KtxB; 7. Kt x Kt, P-QR3; 8. Kt —B3, Kt —-Ktl; 9. Kt x P; P —Q3 gives approximately equal chances. Diarwexs Kt — Q3 6. Bx Kt QP xB 7.PxP Kt — B4 8. Castles Kt — Q5 9. Kt x Kt Q x Kt 10.R -QI B—KKt5 and, on account of his two Bishops, Black’s game is somewhat to be preferred. After 1.P -K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. B — Kt5, Kt-B3 the move 4. P-—Q3, which Anderssen invariably played, is of all those to be taken into consideration the least recommendable since it does nothing towards the capture of the centre. The normal reply to it is 4....B-—B4 (to be followed, if 5.BxKt?, by 5....QPxB; 6. KtxP?, Q-Q5 or 6....BxP, ch, followed by 7.... Q-Q5, ch). Its only drawback is that White by 5. B—-—K3! attacks not only the Bishop but also the King’s pawn which he threatens to capture after first playing Bx Kt. Black must not play BxB as it would open the King’s Bishop’s file for White’s Rook. He can, however, obtain equality by 5....Q—K2!. There follows: 6. Kt —- B3 Castles 7. Castles P—KR3 To prevent B — Kt5 followed by Kt — Q5. 8. Q-Q2 B-—Kt3 White is somewhat ahead in development but has not captured the centre. He will, therefore, be unable to prevent Black from obtaining equality by P-Q3 followed by B-—Kt5 or B - Q2. As, however, White has made the inferior move 4. P - Q3, in this case 4.... P—Q3 is now permissible. There follows: 5. Kt —- B3 P-—KKt3 282 THE OPENINGS L. Paulsen’s move. By developing the Bishop at KKt2 Black gets an easier game than by B — K2. 6. P-KR3 In order to play B —K3 without being annoyed by Kt — Kt5. Oras B -Kt2 7. B-K3 Castles with an even game. * After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. B-Kt5, Kt-—B3; 4.P—Q3, P-Q3 Steinitz’s move 5. P — B3 is generally played. In reply, Black develops on the lines given above and frequently succeeds in advancing his Queen’s pawn after which, if he is not aiming for more, he can easily equalise the game by exchanging the Queen’s pawn for the hostile King’s pawn. * After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. B-Kt5, Kt —B3 the move 4. Kt —B3 leads to the Four Knights’ Game and is dealt with there (see p. 295). While, after 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B-—Kt5 the defence 3.... Kt —- B3 is quite satisfactory, the other reply in which the move 3.... P—QR3 is first played is stronger. The intention underlying this move is nothing less than the eventual imprisonment of White’s King’s Bishop and in not a few variations this actually occurs. Naturally, after 3....P-—-QR3 White can play 4. Bx Kt but this exchange of an attacking Bishop for a Knight is not good for him. Admittedly, if after 4....QPxB; 5.P-Q4; PxP an end-game without pieces is eventually reached, it is won for White: he has a pawn more on the King’s side, whilst Black’s pawn majority on the Queen’s side is, on account of his doubled pawns, neutralised by White’s three pawns there. But while the pieces are on the board, Black, with his two Bishops, has the advantage. 1.P—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. B-Kt5, P — QR3: 4,BxKt QP xB THE OPENINGS 283 After 4....KtPxB; 5.P-Q4, PxP; 6.QxP, Q-B3; 7. Q—Q3 White’s game is somewhat to be preferred. Black has no easy way of development and White’s King’s pawn is strong. 5. Kt — B38 5. Kt x P would be useless on account of the reply 5.... Q -—Q85. Dose P-—B3 Black has now no better way to guard the pawn. If 6.... B - Q3, then 6. P — Q4 is stronger than after the text-move. 6. P -Q4 PxP 7.QxP QxQ 8. Kt xQ B -—Q3 9. B-K3 Kt —K2 10. Kt — Kt3 P —- QKt3 To prevent B — Bd. 11. Castles (QR) Threatening to win a pawn by B x P followed by R xB. LS ee P -QB4 12. Kt — Q2 B-K3 13. P —- B4 Castles (QR) 14, Kt —- B3 Kt - B3 and Black has a fine game. If, after 1. P—-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt -—QB3; 3. B-Kt5, P- QR3; 4. B x Kt, QP x B White plays 5. P - Q4, then: Ose PxP The continuation 5.... Kt -—B3; 6. Kt x P, Kt x P?; 7.Q-K2, Q xP; 8. Kt —-KB3, Q — Q4 (or 8.... Q — Kt5, ch; 9. KKt — Q2!); 9. Kt —-Kt5 followed by P -KB3 costs Black a piece. 6.QxP QxQ 7. KtxQ B —Q2 B — Q3 may first be played. | 8. B-K3 Castles 9. Kt — Q2 Kt — K2 10. Castles (QR) P —-QB4 and Black has a good game. 284 THE OPENINGS This Exchange Variation is now seldom played as White enter- tains greater hopes from this, the strongest attacking opening. The retreat of the Bishop to R4 is preferred, viz. 1. P-—K4, P-K4,; 2.Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.B-—Kt5, P-QR3; 4. B-—Ré4 and now, after the best reply, 4.... Kt-B3, the difficult problems of the Ruy Lopez arise. The strongest attack is, once again, 5. Castles, to which the best reply is 5.... Kt x P!. This open defence to the Ruy Lopez gives Black a fine and free game with his pieces, although his Queen’s side admittedly suffers a pronounced loosening on account of the almost invariable necessity of playing P —- QKt4. 6. P-Q4 P-QKt4 7. B-Kt3 P-—Q4 8.PxP B-K3 This is the main line of play in the Ruy Lopez. In this posi- tion White suffers from the fact that his King’s Bishop has been driven into a blind alley from which it can be released only by the move P—QB3. For this reason White must on no account make the most natural developing move 9. Kt — B3 since after 9.... Kt x Kt; 10. Px Kt the Bishop is hopelessly imprisoned and is threatened with capture by the later advance of Black’s Queen’s Bishop’s pawn to QB5. Thus White is forced into the rather sorry development of his Queen’s Knight at Q2. Black has undoubtedly the superior development and his pieces are in better play. This compensates him for the pronounced weakness of his QB4 and QB3—and, if he succeeds in playing P —- QB4, even this weakness will immediately dis- appear. The continuation therefore is: 9. P-B3 9. P—QR¢4 is not good because of 9....P—Kt5!; 10. P-—R5 (in order to play B —- R4), Kt — B4. eee B-K2 9.... B—QB4 can, be played but it leads only to equality, viz. 10. QKt —Q2, Castles; 11.B-—B2, KtxKt! (better than the continuation 11....P-—B4; 12.Kt—Kt3, B-—Kt3; 13 QKt-Q4, KtxKt; 14. KtxKt, BxKt; 15. PxB, P-—B5; 16. P-B3, Kt - Kt6; 17. R-B2 or K1 for, if Black’s THE OPENINGS 285 attack does not succeed, he is lost on account of his backward Queen’s Bishop’s pawn and White’s strong passed pawn); 12.QxKt, P-B3; 13.PxP (after 13.Q-Q3, P-—Kt3 Black threatens to force an exchange of Bishops by B — B4), Q xP; 14.Q -Q3, P —-Kt3; 14.B-R6,KR-K1; 15.QR-KI1, B-—B2 with an approximately even game. If, instead of 10. QKt — Q2, White plays 10.Q-—Q3, then 10.... Castles; 11. QKt — Q2, P- B4; 12. Px P,e.p., Kt x P(B3); 138. Kt — Ktd and now—not 13....Q—Q2? because of the surprising reply 14. KtxB, Qx Kt; 15. Kt —K4!! after which Black is lost —but 13.... Kt -K4 with equality. 10.R-K1 This move leads, after the most plausible continuation 10.... Castles; 11. Kt -Q4, Q — Q2? to the pretty dual continuation 12. KtxB, P or QxKt; 13. RxKt, known in England as ““Tarrasch’s Trap”; but by a sacrificial combination, first introduced by the author, the Rook move—and with it the most dangerous attack—is completely refuted, viz.: 10; 4c Castles! 11. Kt —-Q4 Kt x KP! 12. P-—B3 B -— Q3 13. Px Kt Q — Rd! and the attack is irresistible. In one particular game the con- tinuation was 14.Q-Q2,P-QB4; 15. Kt-B5, Bx Kt; 16.P xB, QR —-K]; 17. R-—- K2, Kt — B5; 18. B x Kt, B x P, ch; 19. K-—Bl, B—Kt6; 20. R-K3, QPxB; 21. RxB, QxR; 22. Kt —R3, R —K4 and Black won. 13.... B—KKt5?, the Breslau Variation, first played by Herr Bergmann of Breslau, is much inferior and allows White many drawing chances. n After the refutation of the move R—K1]1 there remain for White only inferior attempts at attack, viz. 10. QKt — Q2 and 10. B —- K3. (1) 10. QKt — Q2 Castles! Kt x Kt followed by Kt-—R4 and P-QB4, as played in a similar position by Schlechter against Lasker, easily gives lity. ape 11. B-B2 P_B4 12. Kt-Kt3 Q-Q2 286 THE OPENINGS 13. QKt — Q4 Kt x Kt 14. Kt x Kt P —B4 15. Kt xB Q x Kt and Black has a good game. (2) 10. B-K3 Kt — R4 11. QKt — Q2 If 11. B-B2, then 11.... Kt — B65. iy eee Kt xB 12. Px Kt and Black’s game is quite satisfactory; he can, for example, continue with Kt x Kt, P-—QB4 (to prevent P-QKt4) and Castles. A more natural reply to 10.B-—K3 is 10.... Castles, viz: 10. B — K3, Castles; 11. QKt — Q2 and now 11.... P —- B4 would be dangerous because of 12. P x P,e.p.'!, Ktx P(B3); 13. Kt-— Kt5 with the cunning threat of replying to 13....B—KB4 or 13.... Q —Q2 with 14. QKt — K4!, winning at least the Queen’s pawn. Black must, therefore, play 13....B-—B2 and after 14. Kt x B, Rx Kt; 15. Kt -B3, Q-Q2; 16.Q-Q3, R-QlL!; 17. QR — Q1 is somewhat in difficulties, his Queen’s pawn being in danger. But in reply to 11. QKt —-Q2 Black can easily equalise the game by 11.... Kt x Kt followed by 12.... Kt-—Ré4 and 13.... P—QB4. Also the at first sight somewhat strange-looking move 11.... B—KkKt5 is playable, with the continuation: 12. Kt x Kt Px Kt 13. Q — Q5! If 13. B-Q5?, then 13.... Kt x P! Ie Barer P x Kt! 14, Q x Kt PxP 15. Q x KKtP Q - Q2 Threatening to win the Exchange by B —-KR6. 16. KR -K1 Or 16.Q-—Kt3, QR-Q1; 17.P-B3, B~KB4; 18. K-—-RIl, P - B4!; 19. R -KKtl, P —- Kt3!. 163 3... Q - B4! and Black has a quite satisfactory game. THE OPENINGS 287 In this, the strongest, defence to the Ruy Lopez, the follow- ing gambit-like continuation is worthy of consideration. After 1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. B-Kt8, P — QR3; 4. B — R4, Kt — B3; 5. Castles, Kt x P; 6. P — Q4 Black can play 6....B—K2 and reply to the apparently strongest move 7. R —K1 with the, in this position, surprising counter- attack 7....P—QKt4. There follows: 8.Rx Kt P — Q4! 9. Kt x P! After 9. R—K1, PxB; 10. Px P, B-K3 Black, with his two Bishops, has a good game. 9. .... Kt x Kt! 10. R x Kt PxB 11. Kt —-B3 P —QB3 12. Kt x RP Castles Black has a pawn less but threatens to obtain an attack by B —Q3 followed by Q-R5. Also White’s Knight is badly placed. If afier 7.... P—QKt4 White retreats his Bishop (8. B — Kt3), then Black by 8....P-—Q4; 9.P xP, B-K3 turns the game into the main variation of the 5.... Kt x P defence, with the advantage that White has made the apparently strong but in reality inferior move R — K1 which is refuted by my sacrificial combination (see p. 285). After 1.P —K4, P—K4; 2. Kt - KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. B — Kt5, P-QR8; 4.B-—R4, Kt —B3; 5. Castles the cramped defence 5.... B-K2, introduced by Tchigorin, is played much more frequently than 5....KtxP. It leads to the shutting in of Black’s King’s Bishop and therefore I cannot recommend it. Black always gets a cramped game, which, however, is solid, provided that he takes the utmost care to maintain the centre. White’s game develops very slowly and games played at this variation are generally very lifeless. The usual line is as follows: 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2.Kt-—KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. B-Kt5, P-—QR3; 4. B-R4, Kt - B3; 5. Castles, B —- K2: 6. R-K1 P - QKt4 7. B-Kt3 P —-Q3 288 THE OPENINGS Now White must not attack by 8. P-Q4asafter 8.... Kt x QP; 9. Kt x Kt, Px Kt; 10. Q x P?, P — B4 followed by P - B65 his King’s Bishop is imprisoned and captured. This possibility Black has in mind when playing 3.... P-QR3. 8. P- B3 Kt — QR4 9. B-B2 P-—B4 10. P —-Q4 Q - B2 Tchigorin’s system is very clever and fine. 11. QKt — Q2 Kt - B3 12. P—Q5 Kt - QI] White now laboriously develops his Queen’s Knight wa KB1 at K3 or KKt3 but has by no means an attractive game. One might half jokingly say, ‘‘ Neither side stands well’. White’s game can be improved if at the 9th move (in reply to 8.... Kt -QR4) he does not withdraw the Bishop but plays 9. P-Q4!. Istrongly recommend this novelty of mine. White then finds it easier to get an attack and the game has some appearance of life. The continuation in one particular game was: 9. P-Q4! Kt xB 10. P x Kt B — Kt2! 11.Q-B2 " Castles Now White still cannot play to win a pawn by 12.P xP, PxP; 13. Kt x P since Black offers a sacrifice at his K5 (13.... Kt x P) and after 14. R x Kt?, Bx R; 15. Q x B? plays 15.... Q — Q8, ch and mates next move. 12. QKt — Q2 Kt — Q2 13. P- QKt4 B-KB3 14. Kt —- Kt3 followed by Kt —-R5, and White had the better game. After 1.P —-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3.B — Kt5, P-—QR3; 4. B-—R4, Kt-—B3 the attack by 5. P—Qé4 is not nearly as strong as that by 5. Castles. There generally follows: Diese PxP 6. Castles THE OPENINGS 289 6. P—-K5, Kt —-K5; 7. Castles, B — K2 leads by a transposition of moves to the same position. Oe ete B -K2 If 7.R—KI], then 7....P—QKt4!; 8. B-Kt3, P-—Q3 and again White cannot capture the pawn at his Q4 because of the subsequent imprisonment and capture of his King’s Bishop. If after 7....P—QKt4 he plays 8. P—K5 (recommended by Dr. Krause), then 8....KtxP; 9. KtxKt, PxB; 10.QxP, Castles; 11. B-—Kt5; R-KI!; 12.QxRP, R-Ktl with advantage to Black. Dixit Kt —K5 8. Kt xP Kt — B4! 9. Kt-—B5 Castles! 9.... Kt x B would be fatal because of 10. Kt x P, ch, K - Bl; 11.B-R6, K—-Ktl; 12.P—KB4! (to prevent Kt x KP), P-Q4; 13. P—K6, B x P; 14. Kt x B followed by Q — Kt4, ch. 10. Q—-Kt4 P—KKt3 11.Bx Kt QP xB 12. Kt x B, ch Q x Kt 13. Q —Ktd with an even game. 13. Q-Ktd5 is better than 13. Q-—Kt3 (to which Black’s reply is 13.... R —-K1). In reply to this attack (1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt —-KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B —-Kt5, P—QR3; 4. B —-R4, Kt — B3; 5. P —- Q4) I recommend, however, instead of the usual move P x P, the move Kt x KP as in the corresponding variation of the Berlin Defence (see p. 280). After 5.... Kt x KP there follows: 6. Q —-K2 After 6. Castles the game is transposed into the variation 5. Castles, Kt x P; 6. P — Q4. Ons P —- QKt4! This new move is a decided improvement for Black. 7.QxKt 290 THE OPENINGS If 7. B—Kt3, then 7.... P—Q4 with a good game for Black. er P — Q4! 8. Q-K2 PxB and Black, with his two Bishops, has a promising game. After 1.P —-K4, P - K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. B —- Kt, P-QR3; 4.B-—R4, Kt-—B3 another inferior attack is 5. P — Q3, just as in the Berlin Defence, where that continua- tion is discussed—see p. 281. There remains to be mentioned here only the variation 5....P-QKt4 (instead of P-Q3 followed by P—KKt3, there discussed); 6. B-Kt3, B — B4: 7.B-K3, P —Q3! with an even game. On the other hand, after 1.P—-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt —-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.B—Kt5, P-QR3; 4.B-R4, Kt- 53 the attack 5.Kt-B3 is very good. The best defence is the natural move 5.... B-—B4, whereupon there follows: 6. KtxP After 6.P-—Q3, P-QKt4; 7. B-—Kt3, P-—Q3 the game is similar to the Giuoco Piano. Oc 450 Kt x Kt 7.P-Q4 B -Q3 8. P-— B4? 8. Px Kt, B x P, with an even game, is better. eee Kt — Bd! The only good move. If Kt — B3 or Kt3, then White gets the advantage by the advance of the pawns. 9.P-—K5 Castles! 10. B-Kt3 P —-QKt4! 11. Castles B — Kt2! Black develops with each move! 12.PxB THE OPENINGS 291 If 12.PxKt, then 12.... Q xP, also with advantage to Black. 12. <8; PxP! 13. B x Kt PxB In spite of his doubled pawns Black has decidedly the better game. White’s King’s side has been weakened by the move P —KBé4 so that Black controls White’s K5 and the Bishop at QKt2, acting along the open diagonal, rakes White’s position in a very threatening way. After 1. P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. B-Ktd an unfavourable—but very frequently played—defence is 3.... P — Q3, a move that was strongly recommended by Steinitz. This move, which shuts in the King’s Bishop, is as little recom- mendable here as at the second move. White invariably captures the centre and thus obtains the better game. The most important continuations are: 7 4. P- Qu! B-Q2 Naturally Black attempts to maintain the centre as long as possible. 5. Kt — B3 Kt — B3 6. Castles B — K2 7.R-Kl and Black must give up the centre by 7....PxP, for, if 7.... Castles?, he loses certainly a pawn and perhaps the Ex- change, eg. 8. BxKt, BxB; 9.PxP, PxP; 10.QxQ, QR xQ; 11. KtxP, BxP; 12. KtxB, KtxKt; 13. Kt -— Q3, P—KB4;, 14.P-KB3, B-—B4,ch; 15.KtxB!, KtxKt; 16. B-Kt5, R-Q4; 17. B-K7, R-K1; 18. P-—QB4 (Tar- rasch v. Marco, Dresden tournament, 1892). After 7....PxP; 8. KtxP, Castles; 9. B-—Bl! Black has a cramped game and only if White makes mistakes can it be freed. After 1.P—-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt —QB3; 3. B—Kt5, P-Q3; 4.P-Q4, B—Q2; 5. Kt -B3, Kt -—B3 the following line of attack is even more forceful: 6. Bx Kt 292 THE OPENINGS This exchange of a strong piece for an inferior one is justified by the continuation. Oi scte BxB Now Black cannot well support the point K4 any longer and consequently gets a disadvantage in position. After 7.... PxP; 8.KtxP White’s position is appreciably the better. Black’s best continuation is 8.... B—K2. The attempt to maintain the centre by 7.... Kt—Q2 (if 8. P — Q5?, then 8.... Kt — B4) is refuted by 8. B—-K3 for then White threatens P — Q5. Steinitz’s Defence is only slightly strengthened by the interpolation of the move 3....P—QR3. This line of play (l.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.B-Kt5, P-QR3; 4.B-R4, P-Q3, the Steinitz Defence Deferred, is now very popular but I hold it to be unsatisfactory because of the imprisonment of Black’s King’s Bishop. Against it White has two effective lines of attack —5.P-Q4 and 5. B x Kt, ch, Px B; 6. P—Q4. (The blocking move 5. P —B3 is not good). 5. P-Q4 P -QKt4 Against 5....B-—Q2 I recommend 6.P-B4 (to prevent P —QKt4) followed by Kt — B3, after which White, with the easier and freer game, has the advantage. 6. B —Kt3 Kt xP 7. Kt x Kt P x Kt 8. B-Q5 Not 8. Q xP? because after 8....P—-QB4; 9. Q-Q5, B —K3; 10. Q-B6, ch, B-—Q2; 11.Q-Q5, P-B5 White loses the Bishop. Bice R -Ktl Not 9. B-B6,ch?, B—Q2; 10.BxB,ch (as has recently been frequently played) since this makes Black a present of two tempi. Decks B - Q2 Threatening to imprison and win the Bishop by 10.... P -QB3; THE OPENINGS 293 11. B—Kt3, P —-QB4 followed by P-—B5. The obvious reply is 10. P—QB3 to secure a retreat for the Bishop, but this move, which robs the Knight of its best square, I do not like. I recommend 10. P—K5 by which White gets a good game, eg. 10....P xP; 11.QxP, ch, Q-K2; 12. B-—KB4, Kt — B3; 13. B -QKt3 and White’s pieces and pawns are better posted than Black’s; or 10....Q-—K2; 11. B-KB4, P—-KB3 (by this move Black wins a pawn but gets a bad position); 12. P—K6!, BxP; 13. Castles, Bx B; 14.Q~xB followed by Kt -—B3 and QR-K1. Black’s position is then dangerously threatened and his development hindered. After 1.P —-K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. B — Ktd, P—QR38; 4. B—R4, P — Q3 the other refutation of the defence is: 5. B x Kt, ch This exchange of a strong for an inferior piece needs an ex- - planation. It is justified by the fact that White can now advance his Queen’s pawn without any worry as to a possible capture of the Bishop by the advance of Black’s Queen’s Knight’s and Queen’s Bishop’s pawns. De sae PxB 6. P- Q4 P—-B3 By 6....PxP Black would give up the centre and allow his opponent the better game—advantage in both space and time. The move P — B3 (which with the whole of the following de- fensive system was introduced by Alapin), by maintaining the centre, makes White’s attack more difficult. Here the move is not so dangerous as usual since White has no King’s Bishop. Alapin further developed his game by P—Kt3, Kt -R3, Kt — B2, B —-KKt2, Castles and Q — K2, and this defence was very often successful. To refute it one must know that to the whole system the development of Black’s Knight via KR3 is essential. This, however, White can prevent by B-K3 followed by Q — Q2, e.g. 7. B-K2! P—Kt3 8. Q - Q2! B-—KKt2 9. Kt —- B3 Kt — K2 The Knight has to be contented with this distinctly inferior 294 THE OPENINGS place, where it blocks the Queen and is, itself, almost without a move. After 10. Castles (QR), Castles White has the better game. Two of Black’s pieces, the Knight and the King’s Bishop, are badly posted, while his Queen has no good means of development. Also his castled King is threatened with an attack by pawns (P —-KR3, P —-KKt4, etc.) which has all the more chance of success as Black’s Bishop at KKt2 (here so necessary for the defence of the King’s position) can at any time be exchanged by B-—R6. On the other hand, Black’s chances of attack along the open Queen’s Knight’s file are practically nil, and for all these disadvantages the possession of the two Bishops is no compensation. White has only to guard against one bad mistake, the exchange of pawns. This would be a terrible mistake for several reasons. In the first place, White would put an end to his pressure on the centre (which Black, for his part, could not do without giving up the centre and with it his entire plan). Secondly, White would open the file for his opponent’s Rook (since Black would reply to Px P with BP xP). Thirdly, he would extend the diagonal for Black’s King’s Bishop, which at present has hardly a move. Finally, he would exchange his strong centre pawn at Qé4 for Black’s cramping pawn at KB3 (not K4), that is to say, he would get rid of his own advantage and the disadvantage of his opponent. In short, by exchanging pawns White would play his opponent’s game. On the whole, this refutation of the defence seems to me to be even more effective than the one which avoids the exchange B x Kt, ch. Other defences, less frequently played, are 3.... B—B4, 3.... Kt — Q5 and 3.... P — B4. THREE AND Four Kniauts’ GAMES The Three Knights’ Game occurs when White, after 1. P — K4, P—K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt-—QB3, plays 3. Kt-—B3. Black’s best reply is 3.... Kt -B3, bringing about the Four Knights’ Game. 3.... B — B4? is very bad, the reply being the pseudo- sacrifice 4. Kt x P, 2.e. 4,.KtxP! THE OPENINGS 295 The idea underlying this very frequently occurring pseudo- sacrifice is that White makes the developing move P — Q4 with the gain of a tempo and by this he always gets somewhat of an advantage. 4..... Kt x Kt 5. P-Q4 B — Q3! Also after 5....B xP; 6. Q xB White has the advantage of the two Bishops. 6.PxKt BxP 7. P-B4 B x Kt, ch 8.PxB In spite of his broken pawns, White has the appreciably better game. After 1.P -K4,P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. Kt ~ B3, B-B4; 4. KtxP the move 4....B xP, ch? (instead of 4.... Kt x Kt) is even worse for Black for after 5. K xB, Kt x Kt White, on account of his complete command of the centre (after P — Q4) and his two Bishops, has a big advantage, even though he cannot castle and his King is at first exposed to some attacks. There follows: 6.P—Q4, Q-B3,ch; 7. K—-Ktl, Kt — Kt5 (in order to reply to 8. Q x Kt with 8....Q xP, ch, with mate to follow); 8. Q — Q2 and Black’s attack is at an end. White carries out an artificial sort of castling by P -KR3, B — QB4, K —- R2 and R —-BI1 and has a splendid game. After 1. P—-K4, P —-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. Kt - B3 the move 3.... P— KKt3 is also not to be recommended. After 4. P-Q4!, Px P White does not recapture at once but first plays 5. Kt -Q65 and after 5.... B—Kt2; 6. B-KKt5, P- B3 (if 6.... KKt—-K2?, then 7.B-B6); 7.B-KB4, P-Q3; 8. Kt x QP has an advantage in position and tempi. In the Four Knights’ Game, which arises from 3.... Kt — B3!, White can continue with either 4.B-B4, 4. P-—Q4 or 4. B-—Kt5!. The first two lines are dealt with under the Giuoco Piano (see p. 248) and Scotch Game (see p. 267) re- spectively. Tothe move 4. B —Kt5, which sets more difficult 296 THE OPENINGS problems than the other two moves, there are several satis- factory defences. The simplest is 4....P —QR3, 1.e. 1. P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. Kt-B3, Kt -B3; 4. B~Kt5, P -QR3: 5. Bx Kt! The continuation 5. B —R4 is discussed under the Ruy Lopez (see p. 290). 5 eae QP xB 6. Kt x P Kt x P 7. Kt x Kt Q — Q5 or Q4 8. Castles Q x Kt(K4)! 9. P-—Q4 Q —-KB4! The best place for the Queen. Q4 is not so good. 10.R-K1 B-K3 White is ahead in development but Black threatens to catch up by castling on the Queen’s side and thus developing his Queen’s Rook, e.g. 11. Kt -Kt5, Castles; 12. Kt x B, Px Kt and Black, who threatens P - K4 or P — B4, has a good game. 11. B-Kt5 P —-KR3! Not at once 11.... B—Q3 because of 12. P—KKt4!, Q — Kt3; 13. P-KB4, P—KB4; 14. Kt xB, ch, Px Kt; 15. P — Q5! and White wins. 12. Q — Q3! If 12. B—Ré4, then either 12.... P -KKt4 (followed by Castles) or 12.... B-—Q3. The Queen’s move threatens the win of the Queen by Kt — Q6, ch. {ee K — Q2 13. B — R4 Q —- QKt4! and the game is approximately even. A very frequently played but somewhat elaborate defence is 4.... B— Kt5 in which symmetry is maintained up to a certain point,7.e.1.P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. Kt — B3, Kt — B3; 4. B—-Kt5, B — Kt5: 5. Castles Castles 6. P-Q3 P-—Q3 THE OPENINGS 297 7.B-—Ktd Bx Kt 8.PxB Q —-K2 Metger’s defence. It gives Black a somewhat burdensome but still approximately even game. §8....Kt—K2 is inferior. (Kt — K2 can also be played without the preliminary B x Kt). 9.R-Kl Kt - QI] 10. P- Q4 B — Kt! 11. P—KR3 B-R4 followed by Kt — K3, and the chances are approximately equal as Black has maintained the centre. To make a further ad- vance by P — Kt4 is not without danger to White. After 1. P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. Kt — B3, Kt-B3; 4. B- Kt5, B—Ktd; 5. Castles, Castles; 6. P —-Q3 the defence advocated by Dr. Svenonius, wz. 6.... B x Kt; 7.PxB, P-Q4 (this is the characteristic move of the line of play) is not to be recommended. There follows 8. B x Kt!, PxB; 9.KtxP, Q-Q3; 10.B-B4, R-K1; 1)1.PxP (11. Q-B3, PxP; 12.PxP, RxKt; 13.QR-QI!, B-—Kt5!; 14.RxQ, BxQ; 15.RxKt, PxR leads to approximate equality), Rx Kt; 12. P-Qé4 and, although Black has at his disposal the brilliant resource of 12.... R -K8!, after the con- tinuation 13.BxQ, RxQ; 14. KRxR, PxB; 15. PxP the end-game is somewhat in White’s favour, e.g. 15.... B—K3; 16. QR-Ktl, R-QBI; 17. P-Q5, BxP; 18. P-—B7 and the advanced passed pawn is very dangerous. After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. Kt-B3, Kt-—B3; 4. B—Kt5 the move 4.... B — B4 is also bad for Black since after 5. Kt x P, Kt x Kt; 6. P —Q4, B — Q3; 7. Castles, Castles; 8. P—B4 the attacked Knight has not at its disposal the good square QB5 (as it has after the inter- polation of the moves 3....P—-QR3, 4. B-—-R4—see Ruy Lopez, p. 290). It must, therefore, go to either QB3 or KKt3 and after 9.P-—K5, B-—K2 it will be again attacked by 10. P —Q5 or P — Bd respectively. 298 THE OPENINGS In this last defence, after the moves 1. P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3. Kt—B3, Kt-—B3; 4. B-Kt5, B-B4; 5. KtxP the pawn sacrifice by 5.... Kt-Q5 needs consideration. It is completely refuted by 6. Castles, Castles; 7. B-B4, P-Q3; 8. Kt - B3, B -KKt5 (this pin is the motive underlying the sacrifice); 9. B —K2!. 5.... Castles; 6. Castles, R -K1; 7. Kt —B3!, Kt x P; 8. P—Q4, Kt x Kt; 9. Px Kt, B-—B1; 10. P — Q5 is also good for White. After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt—-—QB3; 3. Kt-B3, Kt-B3; 4. B-Kt5 the strongest defence is 4,... Kt -Q5, developed by Rubinstein. This ingenious line of play involves a pawn sacrifice which is, however, rich in attacking possibilities. White may, however, decline the sacrifice by 5. KtxKt which after 5....Px Kt; 6. P—K5, PxKt; 7.PxKt, QxP! (not 7....PxP,ch because of 8. BxP,QxP; 9. Castles, B—K2; 10. R—K1 or B — B3 with a strong attack); 8. QP xP, B-B4; 9. Castles, Castles leads to complete equality. If after 1. P—-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3. Kt — B3, Kt -—B3; 4. B-Kt5, Kt -Q5 White plays 5. B—R4, then: er B — B4! 6. Kt xP Castles 7. P—Q3 P — Q4! 8. B-KKt5d P — B3! and Black’s strong attacking position at least compensates him for the pawn, e.g. 9. Castles, R-K1; 10. Kt -B3, B- KKt5, or 9.Q-Q2, R-K1; 10.P-B4, P-Kt4!; 11. B-—Kt3, P-KR3; 12. B—KR4, Kt x P!, etc. If after 1.P -K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt - QB3; 3. Kt — B3, Kt-B3; 4.B-Kt5, Kt-—Q5 White plays 5. B-—B4, then Black gets an even stronger attack: Ds, ees B - BA! 6. Kt x P Q - K2! If now 7.KtxBP, then 7....P—Q4!, or, if 7. Bx P, ch, then 7.... K — Bl and in either case White loses a piece. 7.Kt—B3 P -Q4! 8. BxP B —KKt5d! THE OPENINGS 299 9. P-Q3 P-—B3 10. B — Kt3 Kt — Q2 The acceptance of the pawn is, therefore, not recommendable. It comes nearest to being so in the following variation: 1P-K4, P-K4; 2.Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. Kt-—B3, Kt -B3; 4. B-Kt5, Kt — Q5: 5. KtxP Q —K2 6. P — B4 Kt xB 7. Ktx Kt P—Q3 8. Kt —-KB3 P-—B3 Best, according to Rubinstein. The continuation 8... Q xP, ch; 9. K —B2!, Kt —-Kt5, ch; 10. K —Ktl (not K - Kt3 because of Q — Kt3) is not good for Black since White by an artificial castling obtains a good development, e.g. 10.... Q-B3; 11.Q-K2,ch, B-K2; 12.P-KR3, Kt-B3; 13. K — R2, followed by R-K1. 9, Kt -—B3 KtxP 10. Castles Kt x Kt 11. QP x Kt Q — B2 with an approximately even game. White’s best continuation is 12. Kt — Q4 followed by 13. Q-R5. Finally, the variation 1.P-—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt — QB3; 3. Kt — B3, Kt — B3; 4. B —-Kt5, Kt —-Q5; 5. Castles leads, after 5....KtxB; 6. KtxKt, P-—B3; 7. Kt —B3, P—Q3; 8. P-Q4, Q—-B2, only to equality since White has not captured the centre. If anything, Black, with his two Bishops, has the better chances. kkk PONZIANI’S OPENING This opening is characterised by the moves 1. P-—K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3.P-B3. The move 3. P— B3 is to be condemned. Instead of making use of the tempo for his development, White misuses it in that he de- prives his Queen’s Knight of its best square, QB3. This open- ing is thus now very seldom played. Black has several easy defences. The danger for him lies only in this—that after the 300 THE OPENINGS move 3. P—B3 he may imagine that he can win just as he will. The best defence is 3....P—Q4. This move is always ad- vantageous when White’s Queen’s Knight has been deprived of the square QB3 from which to attack Black’s Queen when she plays to Q4 (1.e. 4.PxP, QxP). After the usual con- tinuation 4. Q-—R4—the purpose of 3. P~B3 is, therefore, to develop the Queen at the 4th move!—several gambits come under consideration. For those who have not the courage to sacrifice a pawn in order to refute their opponent’s opening play 3....Kt—B3 is a safe and good defence but the subsequent play must not be along the lines usually accepted. 1.P—K4,P-K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. P — B3, P - Q4:!: 4.Q-—R4 4.PxP would be bad, for White would thus present his opponent with a tempo. On the other hand, 4. B—Kt5 has to be examined. There follows: 4....P xP; 5. Kt x P, B—Q2 (much simpler than 65....Q-Q4; 6.Q-R4, Kt-K2; 7. P-KB4 [threatening B—-B4], B-Q2. Thus it is better to play B - Q2 straight away at move 5); 6. Kt xB, Q x Kt and Black has the advantage. He is two moves ahead and has a fine game. ee B — Q2 This gambit continuation originated with Caro and the author. It is an attempt to reduce the move Q — R4at oncead absurdum. 5.PxP Kt —Q5 6.Q-Ql Kt x Kt, ch 7.QxKt P —~KB4! This strong continuation of the attack was first suggested by the author. It gives a more enduring attack than Kt — B3. 8. P-Q4! P-K5 9.Q-Ql At Kt3 the Queen would be somewhat more exposed. | ee B-Q3 10. P— QB4 P-QKt3 To prevent P—B5. Black always obtains a good attack with his pawn majority on the King’s side. *% THE OPENINGS. 301 There is another gambit continuation, given by Leonhardt, which is also good for Black: 1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt —-KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. P-B3, P-Q4; 4. Q-R4: A cies Kt - B3 5. Kt x P B — Q3! Offering one pawn after another for development. 6. Kt x Kt If 6. P xP, then 6.... Q —K2!; 7.P x Kt, Q x Kt, ch; 8. B — K2, Castles with a good attack. Opa P x Kt 7. P—Q3! Castles 8. B-—Kt5 If 8. B-—K2, then 8.... Kt-—Kt5; 9. P—KR38, Q-—R5 and Black has the superior game. eee P-—KR3 If 9.B-R4, then by 9....P—-Kt4; 10.B-Kt3, PxP,; 11. Px P, Kt x P Black wins back the pawn and has the better development. DO: aces QxB with a fine attacking game for the pawn. After 1.P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —- QB3; 3. P — B3, P-Q4; 4.Q—-—R4 the move 4.... Px P (instead of the gambit play which is an attempt to refute the Queen’s sally to R4) is not to be recommended for after 5. Kt x P Black’s QB3 and K5 are attacked. Black must, therefore, play 5....Q —Q4 and after 6. Kt x Kt, Px Kt! (not Qx Kt? because of B -—Kt5, winning the Queen); 7.B-B4 he loses a tempo. After 7....Q—Q2; 8. Castles, Kt~B3; 9. P-—Q3!, PxP; 10.BxP (threatening B-B5), B—Kt2; 11. R-Q] Black has hardly any compensation for his broken pawn position. On the other hand, after 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. P- B3, P-Q4; 4. Q —R4 the line of play recom- 302 THE OPENINGS mended by Steinitz, 4.... P -B3, is quite playable. Here the “horrid move” P —-KB3 is not to be condemned since White has made the analogous move on the Queen’s side. The play then proceeds somewhat on the following lines: 5. B — Kt, Kt-K2; 6.PxP, QxP; 7.P-Q4, B-Q2; 8. B-—K3 (or Castles, with the same continuation), P x P; 9. P x P, Kt — K4!; 10.BxB,ch (or 10.Kt-B3, KtxKt, ch; 11. Px Kt, Q-KB4), QxB; 11.QxQ, ch, KtxQ and Black has the somewhat better game as in the end-game the isolated Queen’s pawn is not strong. In this opening, 3.... Kt-B3, the defence with the two Knights is, as is so frequently the case, a good safe line of play. After 1.P—-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt—KB3, Kt —-QB3; 3. P—B3, Kt — B3 the usual continuation is: 4,.P-—Q4 Kt x KP 4....P xP would not be good because of 5. P—K5, Kt — K5; 6.Q-—K2, Kt —-B4; 7.PxP. 5. P-Q5 Kt — Ktl Kt — K2 can also be played. 6. B-Q3 Kt x P can also be played at once without danger since Q — K2 can be parried by Q ~ Q4 and B — B4 by Q - B3. 6.0% Kt — B4 7. Kt xP Kt x B, ch 8. Kt x Kt To take with the Queen would not be good because of Q — K2. eee P-Q3 9. Q - B3! To prevent B - B4. 9; i B -K2 10. Castles Castles Black’s game is somewhat cramped by the hostile Queen’s pawn and White is a move ahead in development—and for this the possession of the two Bishops is no adequate compen- THE OPENINGS 303 sation. Black’s mistake lay in permitting the move 5. P — Q5, which he could have prevented by 4....P—Q4! The continua- tion could then be 5.KPxP?, QxP; 6.PxP?, QxQ, ch, followed by Kt -KKt5; or 5. B—-QKt5, KPxP!; 6. KtxP (or 6. P—K5, Kt -K5; 7. Px P, B—Kt5, ch, with advantage in development to Black), B — Q2; 7.P x P, Kt x Kt; 8.B x B, ch, Q xB; 9.Qx Kt, Q x P and Black is a tempo to the good. After 1.P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P- B3 the defence 3.... P-—B4 is less recommendable. Black thus transforms the game, but with colours reversed, into a well- known variation of the Vienna Game (1. P-K4, P-K4; 2. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3; 3. P-B4—see p. 307), only in this case the defender has an extra but doubtful move P-B3. The game would be continued on lines analogous to those in that variation by 4.P-—-Q4, BP xP; 5. KtxP, Kt — B3 and White, corresponding to the second player in that line of the Vienna Game, would have quite a good game. kkk BisHop’s OPENING In contrast to the King’s Knight’s Opening, in which Black has immediately to attend to the attack on his King’s pawn, the Bishop’s Opening (1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. B-— B4) sets the second player no problems. If White does not make a timely transposition into the King’s Knight’s Opening or the Vienna Game, the initiative may even pass over to Black. The strongest reply is 2....Kt—-KB3, the Berlin Defence, after which White may play 3. P—Q3, 3. Kt-QB3, 3. Kt-KB3 or 3. P-Q4. After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2.B-B4, Kt-—KB3; 3.P-Q3 Black can develop, according to his taste, with 3.... Kt — B3 or 3.... B — B4, or he can immediately become aggressive with 3....P-—B3 and 4....P—-Q4. White’s opening is altogether too passive. After 3. Kt -QB3 Black can again quietly go on with his development, whereupon, as White will soon play Kt — B3, 304 THE OPENINGS the game assumes the character of the Giuoco Piano. No ad- vantage is to be gained by 3.... Kt x P since White does not recapture but makes the counter-attack 4. Q —R5 which, after 4... Kt-Q3; 5.QxKP,ch, Q-~K2; 6.QxQ,ch, BxQ; 7. B —Kt3 leads to equality. After 1.P—K4, P-K4; 2.B-—B4, Kt—-KB3 White by 3. Kt -KB3, Kt xP; 4. P-Q4, PxPor by 3. P-—Q4, PxP; 4. Kt-KB3, KtxP can play a gambit giving him many chances. After 5. Q xP, Kt ~KB3 he has for the pawn three tempi, generally a sufficient compensation. The continua- tion is: 6. B-KKt5 B—-K2 7. Kt - B3 Castles 8. Castles (QR) P-B3 Better than Kt —B3 since after Q-—R4 White would have a strong attack. 9. KR-K1 P-Q4 10. Q —R4 and Black has a difficult game. Therefore, after 1. P—-—K4, P—K4, 2. B-B4, Kt-KB3; 3. P-Q4, PxP; 4. Kt -KB3, it is advisable for Black, instead of accepting the gambit, to transpose the game by 4.... Kt — B3 into a comfortable varia- tion of the Two Knights’ Defence (see p. 262). xkke«x CENTRE GAME The Centre Game (1. P—K4, P-—K4; 2. P—Q4), like the closely related Scotch Game, opens up the game too soon. After 2....PxP the threatening continuation 3.Q xP, Kt—QB3; 4. Q-K3 was introduced in tournament play by Wilfred Paulsen at the Berlin congress of 1881. It is historic- ally interesting that of all the masters there present, among whom were Steinitz and Zukertort, not one could give a satis- factory defence. It was left to a 19-year-old student, the author, to discover the correct reply and refutation, 4.... Kt — B3, and to adopt it with success in a minor tournament there. THE OPENINGS 305 The move, admittedly, is obvious, but it appears dangerous on account of the reply 5. P—K5. But that move is refuted by two sacrificial combinations, viz. 5.... Kt -KKt5; 6. Q — K4!, P — Q4; 7. PxP,e.p., ch, B-K83; 8. P xP, Q xP! (not 8.... Q — Q8, ch; 9. KxQ, KtxP, ch, as was suggested later on by Berger) and Black has a splendid development in exchange for the pawn he has sacrificed. If, instead of 6. Q-—K4, White plays 6. Q —-K2, then 6.... P—Q 3!; 7. P—KR3, KKt x KP; 8. P—-KB4, Kt-Q5; 9.Q-K4, Q-R5,ch; 10.K-—-QlI, Q-B7 and Black saves the piece by P-KB4 or B-B4 and remains a pawn ahead. If, in this last variation, White plays, instead of 7.P—KR3, the move 7.P—KB3, then 7... KKtxKP; 8 P—KB4, Kt-—Q5; 9.Q-K4, P-QB4!; 10.PxKt, P-Q4!; 11.Q-B4 (if Q-Q3, then B-B4), Kt x P, ch; 12. K -QI, Kt x R with advantage to Black. With these sacrificial com binations—which the author had, naturally, worked out in private beforehand—one must be thoroughly conversant before adopting the move 4.... Kt — B3. If, after 1.P—K4, P—K4; 2.P-Q4, PxP; 3.Q~xP, Kt - QB3; 4. Q —-K3, Kt — B3, White plays 5. Kt —- QB3, there follows: Duikx: B — Kt5 6. B — Q2 Castles 7. Castles R-KI1! This move hits the nail on the head. The vis-a-vis of Rook and Queen is bound to bring White into difficulties. If 8. P—B3, there follows 8.... P -Q4 with the better game for Black. In his awkward position White can offer the sacrifice of the King’s pawn by either 8.Q-Kt3 (suggested by the author) or 8. B-B4. After either move, however, Black eventually gains the advantage. This opening has since almost completely disappeared from tournament play. DANISH GAMBIT This gambit arises when after 1.P-K4, P—K4; 2. P-Q4, P x P White does not recapture the pawn but plays 3. P —- QB3. Black can decline the gambit and transpose the game into the x 306 THE OPENINGS Goring Gambit Declined (see p. 277) by 3.... P-Q4; 4. KP xP, Q x P, or he can capture the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn and after 4. B — QB4 defend on lines analogous to his play in the Goring Gambit (see p. 276) by 4....Kt-KB3. After 5. KtxP, Kt-—B3 (not 5....B-—Ktd5 because of 6. P-—K5!, P—Q4; 7.PxKt,PxB; 8.QxQ, ch, KxQ; 9. P x P with advantage to White); 6. KKt -K2, B—-B4 (B — K2 followed by P-Q3 is also good); 7. Castles, P-Q3 White has only one tempo more (in addition to the first move) and this is not sufficient compensation for a pawn. There follows: 8.B-—KKt5, P-—KR3; 9.B-R4, Kt-K4; 10.B-QKt3, Kt—-—Kt3; 11. B— Kt3, Castles and Black can successfully defend himself. On the other hand, after 1.P—K4, P-K4, 2. P-—Q4, PxP; 3.P-QB3, PxP; 4. B-—QB4, to capture the third pawn (4....P xP) is very dangerous. To take one pawn after another in order, after White’s 5th move (5. B x P), to be with- out any development is to pour scorn on all reasoned strategy. The variation can be played only if Black is prepared to give back by 5... P—Q4! (suggested by Schlechter) the two pawns he has gained, 7.e. 5.... P—Q4!, 6. Bx QP, Kt —-KB3; 7.BxP,ch, K xB; 8.QxQ, B — Kt5, ch; 9. Q — Q2, B x Q, ch; 10. KtxB. But then the result is an end-game with ap- proximately equal chances. With the general opinion that after 10....P—B4; 11. R-B1 Black has the better game I cannot agree. The Centre Game and the Danish Gambit are not to be recom- mended for White. kkk VIENNA GAME The Vienna Game is characterised by the moves 1. P — K4, P-K4; 2. Kt-QB3. The Knight’s move, like 2. B—B4, is a waiting and developing move without any special tendency. Therefore it cannot be difficult for Black to obtain equality. After the best reply, 2.... Kt-KB3!, Black sometimes even obtains the initiative. By 3. B-B4 the game is transposed into the Bishop’s Opening, under which this line of play is dealt with—see p. 303. 3.P-—KKt3 is bad since Black after 3.... P—Q4!; 4. Px P, Kt x P at once obtains the better game. THE OPENINGS 307 He is already two moves ahead in development—and that as second player! After 1. P-—K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -QB3, Kt-—KB3! the usual continuation—and at the same time the most dangerous for both sides—is 3. P — B4, but this move is here, as always in the Opening, not to be recommended. There follows: Bessie P -Q4! 4.KPxP, P—K5! leads to the Falkbeer Counter-Gambit, which is bad for White—see p. 310. : re Kt x P Black has made four consecutive developing moves—which is as it should be—White, however, only two. From now on the advantage remains with the second player. 5. Kt -B3 B-K2 The simplest and now most frequently played continuation. 5.... B-QKt5 and 5.... B—- KKt5 are also worthy of considera- tion. 6. P — Q4! Or 6. P-—Q3, Kt x Kt; 7. P x Kt, Castles; 8. P—Q4, P—KB3 with a good game for Black. Goce Castles 7.B-Q3 P—KB4 8.PxP,e.p White must take—and thus lose tempi—since Black’s Knight is too strongly posted at K5. ee BxP White cannot now capture twice at his K4 because of the subsequent pin by R-K1. 9. Castles Kt — B3 This counter-attack, first played by Réti in a game against Spielmann, allows White quickly to obtain equality. There- fore, the guarding move, 9....B-—B4!, is to be preferred. Black then maintains the initiative. 10. Kt x Kt Px Kt 11.BxP Kt x P 12. Kt — Ktd! B — Ba! 308 THE OPENINGS Naturally, White now must not capture twice at his KB5, even if he exchanges Queens before making the second cap- ture. Also, 13.B xB, Kt xB; 14.Q9xQ, QR xQ; 15. Kt —K6 would be bad because of 15....B-—Q5, ch. But by the follow- ing move White forces an even game: 13. P — B3! Bx Kt If 13....BxB, then 14. Kt xB. 14.QBxB Qx«B 15. Q x Kt BxB with complete equality. * After 1. P-K4, P—K4; 2. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3; 3. P — B4, P—-Q4; 4.BPxP, KtxP Louis Paulsen’s move, 5. Q-B3, is even less recommendable. There follows, according to Steinitz: Ds.cens Kt — QB3! 6. B — QKt5d! 6. Kt x Kt is bad because of 6.... Kt-Q5; 7.Q-Q3, Px Kt; 8.QxP, B-KB4. 6.25 Kt x Kt 7.PxKt Q — B5, ch 8. P—-Kt3 Q — K5, ch 9.QxQ PxQ White must now capture the Knight, for if, instead, 9. P — Q4, there follows: 9....PxP, e.p.; 10.PxP, B-—Q2 and the King’s pawn will be captured, even after 11. B- KB4. 10. B x Kt, ch PxB 11. Kt -K2 Or 11. P-~Q4, PxP,e.p.; 12. Px P, B— KB4 and the Queen’s pawn has to be guarded by the King since 13. P — Q4 is out of the question because of 13.... B -K5, winning a piece. Lee. B — K2! 12.R -Bl Castles 13. R — B4 P —B3! and Black, with his two Bishops, has the better game, e.g. 14.RxKP, B—-KB4; 15. R-QB4, PxP; 16. Rx P, B-Q3, THE OPENINGS 309 or 14.P xP, BxP; 15.R xP, B-—B4; 16. R-QB4, QBxP; 17.R xP, QR - KI], in either case with the far superior posi- tion and development for Black. Thus the Vienna Game is not to be recommended for the first player or at least only if followed by a transposition into the Three and Four Knights’ Games, i.e. 1.P—K4, P-—K4; 2. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3; 3. Kt — B3!, Kt — B3. Kinq’s GAMBIT This opening arises from the moves 1.P—K4, P-Ké4; 2.P-—-KB4. White offers the sacrifice of a pawn in order to open the King’s Bishop’s file for his Rook and to occupy the centre with two pawns. But the early advance of the King’s Bishop’s pawn is disadvantageous; indeed, I maintain it to be a decisive mistake. The refutation lies in 2....P—Q4 with the continuation 3. KP x P, P—K5!, with which Black in his turn offers a gambit, the so-called Falkbeer Counter-Gambit (which, however, was first played, though in a somewhat different form, by the great French master, Labourdonnais). This gambit is irresistible since it is directed against a position which is already compromised (by the move 2, P—KB4). It completely invalidates White’s intentions: the King’s Bishop’s file is not opened; on the contrary, the pawn at White’s KB4 (isolated, so to say) is a far from pleasing sight; while the occupation of the centre is already impossible. Therefore, since White’s intentions can be thus drastically invalidated, it is almost madness to play the King’s Gambit, the more especially as Black has at his disposal, in addition to the Falkbeer Counter-Gambit, other good defences, wz. the declining of the gambit by 2.... B-B4 or its acceptance by 2....P xP (which, however, means loss of tempo and the surrender of the centre) and then, if 3. Kt -KB3 (the King’s Knight’s Gambit), the counter-attack 3....Kt—KB3 or 3.... P-Q4. At one time the King’s Gambit was regularly defended by accepting it and then playing P -KKt4, a move which fatally weakens the King’s side and which I call the “Suicide Move’. The defenders were thus prepared to accept many positional disadvantages as the price to be paid for a mere superiority in material—to my mind, a fundamentally unsound strategy. 310 THE OPENINGS One must strive for a good position, not for an advantage in material! The fact, too, that White’s attack against the old defence was almost invariably successful shows that my con- ception of strategy is the correct one. As the non plus ultra of a defence entirely void of common sense I must cite for the pupil’s benefit the Muzio Gambit, which is characterised by the following moves: 1.P—K4, P-—Ké4 (the only correct move which the second player makes in this opening!); 2. P- KB4, PxP?; 3.Kt—-KB3, P-—KKt4?; 4.B-B4, P-Kt5??; 5. Castles, Px Kt. And this gambit was thus played for scores of years! The Falkbeer Counter-Gambit, of which I have long main- tained that it refutes the King’s Gambit, runs on the following lines: 1.P—K4, P—-K4; 2.P-KB4, P-Q4!; 3. KPxP, P —-K65: 4, P —Q3! The best attempt to repair White’s unacsthetic position. Black’s King’s pawn must be got out of the way. 4... Kt -KB3 5.PxP If 5. Kt —-QB3, then 5.... B-QKt5. Bema Kt x KP 6. Kt -KB3 B-QB4 7.Q-K2 Now 7....B—B7, ch would be bad because of 8.K-QI, QP, ch; 9. KKt - Q2!, P-KB4; 10. Kt-—B3. 7....QxP is also not to be recommended since it would lead to the same continuation. 7.....P-—B4 would cramp Black’s Queen’s Bishop and after 8. B-K3, QxP; 9.BxB, QxB; 10. Kt -B3, Q-—K2; 11. Kt -Q5, Q-—Q3; 12. Castles, P — B3; 13. Kt -B3, QxP,ch; 14. Kt—Q2, Castles; 15. Kt x Kt, PxKt; 16.Q*P White would have equal forces and would obtain the more rapid development, eg. 16.... Kt —Q2; 17. B-B4, ch, K-Rl; 18. KR-B1, QxQ; 19. Kt xQ. aes eae B — B4! This move was first discovered by the author. Apparently to he refuted by 8. P - KKt4, in reality it soon results in a clear advantage for Black. 8. P-KKt4 THE OPENINGS . 311 8. Kt—B3 is better but after 8....Q—K2 Black has the advantage. 8. .... Castles! 9.PxB R-K1 Now White’s position is critical. If 10. Kt -K5, then Black wins by 10.... Q — R5, ch followed by Kt — B7, ch. 10. B-Kt2 Kt — B7 11. Kt -K5 Kt xR 12.BxKt Kt — Q2 Not 12....P—KB3 because of 13. P—Q6! and White then threatens to win something by either Q — B4, ch or Bx P. 13. Kt -QB3 White cannot save the piece. Es Fae P-—KB3 14, Kt —-K4 Px Kt 15. Kt xB Kt x Kt 16. P xP Black is the exchange ahead but White’s great pawn strength has now to be broken. Also a Rook and two Bishops are fre- quently superior to two Rooks and a Knight. But now the bad position of White’s King proves decisive. a eer Q — R5, ch 17. K-Bl R —-KB1! After this White loses one of his centre pawns. If 18. P — B6, there follows not 18....PxP but 18....QR—-K1! 18. K - Ktl Q — Q5, ch 19. B-K3 Q x KP 20. R- Kl Kt — Q2! 21.Q-—B4 K-RIl 22. B-K4 QR —-K1 23. B-— Q4 Q —- BS 24. R —- K2 Kt — B3 25. B x Kt PxB! and Black wins (Spielmann v. Tarrasch, Mahrisch-Ostrau tournament, 1923). * After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2.P-KB4, P—Q4! White is, however, not forced to accept the gambit by playing 3. KP x P. 312 THE OPENINGS He can decline it by 3. Kt -KB3. But then after 3....QP xP; 4. Kt xP he has, with equal forces, the inferior game, for, just as in the Falkbeer Counter-Gambit Accepted, the hostile King’s pawn cramps his game and the horrid position of the pawn at his KB4 means a loosening of his King’s side. It is the second player who has the attacking chances. The game may con- tinue on the following lines: 4. ose B — Q3 4.... Kt — Q2 is also good. 5. P—-Q4 P xP, e.p. 6.BxP Kt —KB3 7. Castles Castles 8. Kt - QB3 QKt — Q2 Black must get rid of his opponent’s strong advanced post. It would not be good, instead of developing, to set out to win material by 8....BxKt; 9.PxB, Q-Q5,ch; 10.K-Rl, Q xP for the attempt would rapidly end in a catastrophe: 11. B-KB4, Q-QB4; 12.BxP, QxB?; 13.RxKt, PxR; 14.Q-—R5, P—B4; 15.Q-Kt5, ch, K—RI1; 16. Q-BB6, ch, K —Ktl; 17. Kt —Q5 and wins (Tarrasch v. Eckart). 9. Kt x Kt B x Kt and Black has the better position and development. After 1.P-K4, P-K4; 2.P-—KB4 the other way of declining the King’s Gambit—by 2.... B -B4—allows White chances of equalising the game. If is, therefore, not a con- clusive refutation of the gambit. The usual continuation is: 3. Kt -KB3 P-Q3 4.B-B4 Kt — QB3 5. P-Q3 Kt — B3 6. Kt - B3 B — K3! This move, first suggested by the author, is the simplest and best. After7.BxB?, PxB; 8.PxP?, PxP Black has the much freer game. 7.B-Ktd P-QR3 8. Bx Kt, ch PxB and Black, with his two Bishops, has a good game. THE OPENINGS 313 Instead of 6.... B- K3, the move 6.... B —- KKt5 is frequently played. However, it gives White the opportunity for a correct sacrificial combination, frequently occurring in such positions. 7,.P—~KR3 Dr. Alekhine recommends, instead of this, 7. Kt -QR4 to which Black can reply with either 7.... Castles or 7....Q—K2 followed by 8.... Castles (QR). Tits, B x Kt Here also B — K3 is very good. 8.QxB Kt —- Q5 Instead of this, 8....PxP; 9.BxP, Kt-—Q5 is worthy of consideration. 9.Q-Kt3 Kt xP, ch Either 9....Q—K2 or 9.... Kt-—R4; 10. Q-Kt4, P-—KKt3 is safer. 10. K-Ql Kt xR 11.QxP K — Q2! Tf 11.... R-KBI1, then 12.PxP,PxP; 13. B—Kt5, B-KQ2; 14. R-Bl. 12.PxP PxP 13. R-Bl B-K2 and now after 14. B-—Kt5 or 14.Qx BP White has a very powertul attack. * The King’s Gambit is now very seldom played—and rightly 8O. kk FRENCH DEFENCE The French Defence is characterised by the moves 1. P — K4, P-—K3. The move P —K3 is not completely equal in value to the move P—K4. For one thing, White, and not Black, commands the centre, and then—as is always the case when P - K3 is played before the development of the Queen’s Bishop ——that piece is shut in. Naturally, it is exceptionally difficult for White to turn these minute advantages to account; never- 314 THE OPENINGS theless, I cannot consider 1....P-—K3 an adequate reply to 1.P-K4. 1.... P—K4 is, theoretically and practically, the only completely satisfactory answer to 1. P —-K4. After 1.P—K4, P-K3; 2. P-—Q4 Black by 2....P-Qé4 attempts to remedy as far as possible the mistake of his first move, in that he makes a stand in the centre and is even aggressive. The simplest reply, invariably adopted by Morphy, is the exchange of pawns, which leads to a completely even and frequently symmetrical game without any great com- plications: 3.PxP PxP 4.Kt-—KB3 Kt —KB3 5. B -Q3 B-Q3 6. Castles Castles 7.B-KKtd5 B-—KKt5 8. QKt — Q2 QKt — Q2 9.P~—B3 P-B3 10. Q - B2 Q — B2 This Exchange Variation of the French Defence leads very frequently to a hopelessly drawn position. But by the pawn exchange the problems in the position are not solved but avoided. The move 3. P x P frees Black’s Queen’s Bishop and therefore cannot be the best. White can obtain an advantage only if, sooner or later, he plays P-K5, by which move he increases the advantage in space which he had after Black’s first move and maintains the imprisonment of Black’s Queen’s Bishop. But when shall the King’s pawn advance? Only with the gain of a tempo and best when the development is somewhat advanced. However, after P —-K5, Black obtains counter-chances by attacking White’s pawn chain and thus he may, perhaps, eventually equalise the game. Nevertheless, White frequently remains with some advantage in space. In any case it is praiseworthy and recommendable to seek com- plications by P — K5 instead of avoiding them by P x P. At the third move (after 1. P—K4, P—K3; 2. P—Q4, P — Q4) the move P —- K5 is not good since it is played without the gain of a tempo. Black at once obtains an attack on the pawn chain. There follows: : ee P —-QB4 4.P-—QB3 Kt —- QB3 5. Kt - B3 THE OPENINGS 315 The support by P — KB4 should be avoided at this early stage. ee Q - Kt3 6. B-Q3 P xP! 6... B—Q2 is not so good because of 7.PxP, BxP; 8. Castles, as played by L. Paulsen. There follows 8.... P—QR4! (to prevent P-QKt4); 9.P-—QR4 with an ap- proximately even game. 1k XP B — Q2! Now White’s Queen’s pawn is attacked, and, if 8. B — B2, then 8.... Kt — Kt5forces the exchange of the Bishop since 9. B — Kt3 is out of the question because of 9.... B —- Kt4 or Q — R3, with the threat of Kt—Q6, ch. White must, therefore, lose a tempo. 8. B-K2 KKt —- K2 Black continues the attack on the Queen’s pawn, which cannot easily be guarded. 9. P-QKt3 Kt - B4 10. B —- Kt2 B — Kt5, ch It is obvious that Black has the better game. 11. K-Bl Castles (KR)! Black, who now threatens further attacks by P — B3, has the superior game. * Therefore, after 1.P—K4, P—K3; 2. P-Q4, P-—Q4 it is better to guard the attacked pawn—by 3. Kt-QB3. Black’s best reply is to develop with attack by 3.... Kt-KB3. 3... P x P is inferior since Black thus gives up the centre and with loss of atempo. After that move White by simple developing moves gets the better game with good chances of attack: 4.KtxP, Kt-—-Q2; 5. Kt-—KB3, KKt-B3; 6.B-Q3, Kt x Kt; 7. B x Kt, Kt — B3; 8. B-Q3, P- QKt3; 9. B -Kt5, B —Kt2; 10. Castles, B-K2; 11. Q-—K2, Castles; 12. QR- Ql, or 8. B-Kt5, B-K2; 9.B-Q3, P-—B4; 10. Castles, PxP; 11. Kt xP, Castles and White is two tempi ahead in development. After 1.P—-K4, P-—K3; 2. P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt -QB3 the move 3.... B —Kt5 is also not quite satisfactory as the Bishop’s 316 THE OPENINGS place is at either Q3 or K2. To this inferior move White can very well reply with 4. P-—K5, with the continuation 4.... P—QB4; 5. B-—Q2!. This very fine move was first suggested by E. Varain of Munich and has since been frequently adopted by Bogoljubow—and with success. After either 5....PxP; 6. Kt —-Kt5, B-B4; 7. P—QKt4, P-QR3; 8. PxB, Px Kt; 9.Q -Kt4, K -B1; 10. Kt - B3, Kt -QB3; 11. Bx P, Kt — K2; 12. Castles (KR) or 5....Kt—K2; 6. Kt—Kt5, B xB, ch; 7.Q~xB, Castles; 8. P—QB3 White has the somewhat better game. * After 1.P-K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt —- QB3, Kt — KB3! White can now advance the King’s pawn with the gain of a tempo—or, at least, without the loss of one. Only, after 4. P ~K5, KKt — Q2 he must not continue with 5. P — B4? but with the move 5. Kt—B3 (first recommended by the author). After 5....P—QB4; 6.P xP, Kt -QB3; 7. B—KB4, BxP; 8.B-Q3 White has a game with many chances. (4. B-Q3—instead of 4. P—K5—is not so good because of 4....P-B4!; 5.Kt-B3, BPxP; 6. KKtxP, P-K4; 7. Kt -B3, P — Q5, and White’s game is somewhat cramped). * After 1.P-K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt-QB3, Kt —KB3 the usual—and better—course for White is to delay the advance of the King’s pawn and first ward off his opponent’s attack by making the pinning move 4. B-Kt5. To this Black has three possible replies, wz. 4....B-—K2, 4.... B-Kt5 and 4....PxP—but after each of them White gets some advantage. After 4.... B —K2 the best continuation is: 5. P—K5 KKt — Q2 6.BxB QxB In this position White has several lines of play at his disposal. The oldest is Q — Q2 followed by Kt -Q1, P-QB3, P -KB4, etc. But this formation was refuted by the author in two games at the Frankfort tournament of 1887 by means of a sacrifice of the Exchange at White’s KB3, wiz. 7. Q - Q2, THE OPENINGS 317 Castles (if 7....P—QB4?, then 8. Kt-—Ktd); 8. Kt-Ql, P-QB4; 9.P-QB3, P-B3; 10.P-KB4, Kt-B3; 11. Kt-B3, PxQP; 12.BPxP, PxP; 13. BPxP, RxKt; 14.P xR, Q—-R8, ch, followed by Kt x QP—and the sacrifice of the Exchange brilliantly justifies itself. Another system of development for White, introduced by the author at the Nuremburg Congress of 1883, is 7. B — Q3 followed by QKt — K2 and P—QB3. 7. Kt—Kt5 (to which Black’s best reply is Kt — Kt3) is also good. White again continues with P —- QB3. The best system, however, is one that may involve the giving up of the pawn centre. In this White guards his Queen’s pawn not with P—QB3 but with pieces. If Black, after attacking the centre by P — QB4, captures the Queen’s pawn, then the piece which recaptures is strongly posted at White’s Q4. If Black does not make the exchange, White himself may make it later and then post a piece at his Q4. If Black makes a further attack on the centre by P—-KB3, White ex- changes pawns (KP x P) and then plays to occupy the other strong point (his K5) with a piece. 7.Q-—Q2 Castles 8.P-B4 P —-QB4 9. Kt —-B3 It is much better to leave the opponent to make the pawn capture than to make it oneself, for thus one avoids the loss of a tempo. Daa) Kt — QB3 If 9....P—B3, then 10. KPxP!, QxP; 11. P—KKt3!. 10. P—KKt3 This move was introduced by Rubinstein. The King’s Bishop is, admittedly, very badly posted at KKt2, but later on a regrouping of pieces will take place. LO: acc P —-QR3 Or 10....PxP; 11. KKt xP, Q-Kt5; 12. Castles. 11. B-Kt2 P —-QKt4 12. Castles (KR) Now Castles (QR) would be a grave mistake since Black by 318 THE OPENINGS P-—B5 followed by P-—Kt5 would obtain an overwhelming attack. | > PxP 13. KKt x P Kt x Kt 14.Q «Kt Q —- B4 15.QxQ Kt xQ White has an advantage since he commands more territory and has the freer position, Black’s game being cramped by the pawns in the King’s file. In a game Tarrasch v. Teich- mann in the San Sebastian tournament of 1912 there followed: 16. Kt-K2, B-Q2; 17. Kt-Q4, QR-Bl1; 18. K-B2!, R-B2; 19. K-K3, R-K1; 20. R-B2!, Kt-Kt2; 21. B-Bl, Kt-—R4; 22.P—-Kt3, P-R3; 23.B-Q3, Kt-—B3; 24. Kt x Kt, B x Kt; 25. K —-Q4 with an obviously superior game for White. He eventually won. Certainly somewhat better than 4.... B —-K2 is McCutcheon’s move 4.... B —Kt5, viz. 1. P—K4, P—K3; 2. P—Q4, P— Q4; 3. Kt -QB3, Kt -KB3; 4. B-Ktd, B — Kt5: 5. P-K5 P-—KR3 6. B-Q2 B x Kt 7.PxB Kt — K5 8. Q —- Kt4 K —- Bl! Better than P —- KKt3, which loosens the King’s side. 9. P-KR4 To prevent the continuation 9....KtxB; 10. Kx Kt, Q — Kt4, ch. Di sine P~-QB4 10. R-R3 Kt — QB3 11. B- Q3 Kt xB 12. K x Kt P — BS! 13. B -K2 Kt — K2! So that after 14. R —-Kt3? the King’s Knight’s pawn can be guarded by 14....Kt-—B4. The defence is thus completed and the counter-attack begins. 14, Kt — B3 B - Q2 15. Q - B4 P —-QKt4 16. P—R5 P—-R4 17. Kt — R4 Kt — B4 THE OPENINGS 319 (Sir George Thomas v. Tarrasch, Carlsbad tournament, 1923). Black eventually won. * After 1.P—-K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-—Q4; 3. Kt —- QB3, Kt—KB3; 4. B-Kt5, B-Kt5 White achieves even less by playing 5.P xP: Ona Q x P! 6. Bx Kt PxB 7. Q—Q2 Q — QR4! 8. KKt — K2 Kt — Q2 9. Kt—Bl Kt — Kt3 10. Kt — Kt3 Q —-KKt4 11.QxQ PxQ The game is approximately even; if anything, Black, with his two Bishops, has somewhat of an advantage. ¥ But the value of McCutcheon’s system is rendered doubtful by the move 5. Kt — K2!, first played by Mieses in the Vienna tournament of 1907. 1. P-K4, P—K8; 2. P—Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt -QB3, Kt —- KB3; 4. B-—Kt5, B—Kt5; 5, Kt — K2!: De eas PxP This move, although always played in this variation, is a mis- take. It would have point only if Black could maintain the pawn but after White’s P —- QR3 this is not the case. The move, therefore, means loss of tempo and the giving up of the centre. I recommend, instead, 5....P—KR3. If 6.B-—R4, then 6.... P-KKt4; 7. B-Kt3, Kt xP, winning the King’s pawn for good. If, however, 6. Bx Kt, then 6....QxB and Black has a much better game than after 5.... Px P. 6. P-QR3 B-—K2 7.BxKt BxB P xB is also not good for Black. 8. Kt xP 320 THE OPENINGS White commands the centre and has the better game. A possible continuation is: Bes P-—K4 If 8....P-QKt3, then 9. P-—KkKt3! followed by B-Kt2. 8.... Kt — B3 is best. 9.Q-—-Q3 PxP 10. Kt x B, ch Q x Kt 11.QxQP QxQ 12. Kt xQ with the somewhat better game for White. After 1.P—K4, P-K3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt - QB3, Kt —-KB3; 4. B—Kt5 the third line of play at Black’s disposal, viz. 4....PxP, at the very outset fails to inspire confidence since Black gives up the centre and presents his opponent with a tempo by assisting his Knight to join in the attack. Black can obtain equality only if White subsequently makes mistakes. White has several good continuations at his disposal: 5. B x Kt Q xB 6. Kt xP Q- Ql This is considered to be best. But now White is two tempi ahead and commands the centre. 7. Kt -KB3 Kt — Q2 8. Q —-Q2 Or, as Maréczy recommends, 8. P — B3, with the continuation 8.... P—- QB4; 9. Q-R4, PxP; 10. Castles. Sec P—QB4 9. Castles PxP 10. KtxP Kt — B4 11.Q-K3 and White has a pronounced advantage in development. Or, after 1.P—-K4, P-K3; 2. P-Q4, P-—Q4; 3. Kt —- QB3, Kt -—KB3; 4. B-Kt5, P xP: 5. KtxP B-K2 6. B x Kt BxB 7. Kt-—-KB3 Kt — Q2 8. Q — Q2 THE OPENINGS 321 Better than 8. B —Q3 for then after 8.... P—B4! the Queen’s pawn needs protection. See P—B4 9. Castles with a splendid game for White. In this line of play I particu- larly recommend castling on the Queen’s side for the first player. We have still to discuss the frequently occurring position which results when Black plays (instead of 6....BxB) 6.... PxB. This move was drastically refuted by Bogoljubow in one of the games of his first match with Dr. Alekhine. The essentials for White are (1) the development of his King’s Bishop by P - KKt3 and B — Kt2 in order to safeguard himself in the King’s Knight’s file, and (2) castling on the Queen’s side. Then very soon the second player will be at his wit’s end to find a satisfactory continuation. In the game between Bogol- jubow and Dr. Alekhine the moves were: 1. P-K4, P—K3; 2. P-Q4, P-—Q4; 3. Kt -QB3, Kt —- KB3; 4.B-Kt5, PxP; 5. Ktx P, B-K2, 6. Bx Kt, PxB: 7. Kt -KB3 P—KB4 8. Kt -B3 P—QB3 9. P_KKt3! Kt — Q2 10. B-Kt2 Q-B2 11.Q-K2 P-—Kt4 Also after 11.... P—Kt3 White has the much better arranged game. 12. Kt -K5 B -Kt2 13. Castles (QR) Kt — Kt3 14.Q-R5 and White had the better game. We see therefore that against the best play by White the French Defence fails to lead to complete equality. 322 THE OPENINGS SICILIAN DEFENCE The Sicilian Defence, which is brought about by the moves 1, P—K4, P —- QB4, gives the second player a better game than he obtains from the French Defence or the other inferior replies to 1.P—K4. The move 1.... P—QB¢4 is certainly not strictly correct, for it does nothing towards development but merely attempts to render difficult the building up of a centre by the first player. This, however, it successfully accomplishes. For White generally attempts quite early to open out the game by P—Q4, and the resulting exchange of his Queen’s pawn for the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn is on principle dis- advantageous to him, for a centre pawn is more valuable than a Bishop’s pawn. As compensation for this, however, White has the decidedly freer game and an advantage in tempo. But in the long run Black has an extra pawn in the centre and this gives him a chance which is not afforded by the French Defence or other inferior defences. White has better play for his pieces but Black has the better pawn position, and the one who now plays more strongly will increase his advantages and lessen his disadvantages. Therefore the Sicilian Defence is excellent for a strong player who is prepared to take risks to force a win against an inferior opponent. Against the best play, however, it is bound to fail. ¥% After 1. P—K4, P —-QB4 the usual line of play is: 2. Kt -KB3 To 2. P—QB3? Black can advantageously reply with 2.... P — Q4!. ® ya Kt — QB3 Or 2....P—K3, which generally leads to the same variation by transposition of moves. 3. P—-Q4 If White wishes to open out the game quickly, this move is better than 2. Kt —B3, for that blocks the Queen’s Bishop’s , pawn which in many variations can with advantage be played to QB4. A PP 4.KtxP Kt — B3 | Here, as is nearly always the case, the defence with the twp THE OPENINGS 323 Knights is the best line of play. In this case it forces White to defend his King’s pawn and so block his Queen’s Bishop’s. 5. Kt - QB3 Not 5. KtxKt, KtP x Kt; 6. P-K5 since the King’s pawn would be lost after 6....Q—R4, ch—as frequently occurs in this opening. Now, however, White threatens to drive back the Knight by Kt x Kt followed by P-K5, and against this something has to be done. i ioe P — Q3! Here the inferior move 5... P—K3 (with which I shall deal later) is frequently played. 6. B-K2 P-K3 These last two pawn moves characterise Wilfred Paulsen’s line of play, which gives the second player a very solid game, difficult for White to break down. The further moves appertaining to this system are P—QR3, Q-B2 and B-Q2 (or P-—QKt4 followed by B — Kt2). Black is confined to three ranks while White has occupied four. The attack is hard to carry out but I prefer White’s game. 7. Castles B-—K2 8.K-Rl In order to be able to advance the King’s Bishop’s pawn with- out any danger. rere P-QR3 9. P- B4 Q - B2 10. B-K3 10. P - QR4, to prevent P — QKt4, is also very good. 10. .... Castles 11.Q-K1l! This fine move was introduced by Yates. The Queen is to join in the attack at KKt3. i) B—-Q2 12.R-Ql P-—QKt4 13. P—QR3 Kt —-QR4 14. Q —Kt3 Kt — Bd 15. B-Bl HWhite attacks on the King’s side, Black on the Queen’s. White should have the better chances. 324 THE OPENINGS After 1.P-K4, P-QB4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt-QB3; 3.P-Q4, PxP; 4. KtxP, Kt-B3; 5. Kt—-QB3, P-Q3!; 6.B—K2 Black can adopt the King’s Fianchetto system instead of Paulsen’s: i Saree P~KKt3 Black must keep firmly in mind that he must not make this move too soon. It should be played only after White has played Kt -QB3 for otherwise White can greatly strengthen his game by P — QB4, as pointed out by Maréczy,e.g. 1. P — K4, P—QB4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P-Q4, PxP; 4. Kt xP, P-—KkKt3?; 6. P-—-QB4!, B-Kt2; 6.B-K3, P-Q3; 7. B-—K2, Kt-B3; 8. Kt-QB3 and White has a very good game. 7.B-K3 B -Kt2 8. Castles Instead of this move, Q — Q2—to be followed by Castles (QR) —is worthy of consideration. On the other hand, the move 8. Kt —- Kt3, generally recommended as the best, is not at all to my liking. By it White goes back in development, not forward. The justification offered for the move—that it is necessary in order to prevent P-—Q4—is unsound. After 8. Castles the move 8.... P—Q4 would be a mistake because of the reply 9. B ~ QKts, B-—Q2; 10. Px P, winning a pawn. 8. 0... Castles Again, Kt — Kt3 is not good. The text-move offers the sacri- fice of the ‘“Minor Exchange’”’ (see p. 230). Biv saee Kt — KKt5 If 9....P—Q4, then there follows 10.PxP, Kt xP (if 10... Kt —- QKt5, then 11. P-—Q6!, QxP?; 12. QKt-—Kt5 with a smashing double attack. If 12....Q-B4, then 13. Kt —- K6); 11. QKt x Kt, QxKt; 12.B-—B3, Q-B5; 13. P-QKt3, Q-R3; 14. Kt x Kt, Px Kt; 15. P—B3, B- B4; 16. QR-QI1 and White has the decidedly better game; he has command of the only open file and Black’s Queen’s side pawns are isolated and weak. 10. B x Kt BxB 11. P-B4 THE OPENINGS 325 Threatening to imprison the Queen’s Bishop by P — B5d. ere B —Q2 White is ahead in development and has a very fine game. He has now an advantage of three tempi. After 12. Kt x Kt, P x Kt he can start a pawn attack by 13. P —B5d. If after 1.P—K4, P-QB4; 2. Kt-—KB3, Kt-—QB3; 3. P-Q4, PxP; 4. Kt xP, Kt -B3; 5. Kt -QB3 Black does not take into account the threat of the advance of the hostile King’s pawn but plays 5.... P—-K3, then the execution of that threat puts him somewhat at a disadvantage. (Naturally this position can arise from a different sequence of moves.) 6. Kt x Kt! KtP x Kt 7. P-K5 Kt — Q4 8. Kt —-K4 Q - B2 If 8.... P—KB4, then 9.PxP,ep., KtxP; 10. Kt — Q6, ch, B x Kt; 11. Q x B, Q — Kt3! (threatening Q x P, ch); 12. B- Q3, P-—B4; 13.B-KB4, B-Kt2; 14. Castles (KR), R-QBI; 15. P-QKt3 with the better game for White. Black is dis- tinctly weak on the black squares. 9. P-KB4 P—-KB4 10. Px P, e.p:! 10. Kt -Q6, ch is less recommendable because of 10.... Bx Kt; 11. Px B, Q—Kt3! (if 11....Q x P?, then 12. P — B4, Q —Kt5, ch; 13. B-—Q2 and Black loses a piece); 12. P —- B4, Kt-B3!. The advanced pawn admittedly exerts great pressure on Black’s game but it is in too precarious a position. LO ssid Kt x P (B3) 11. Kt x Kt, ch Px Kt 12. Q —BR5, ch K -Ql 13. B—-K3 followed by Castles. White has the advantage of the safer position for his King. The position after the moves 1.P—K4, P-QB¢4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3; 3. P-Q4, PxP; 4. Kt x P, Kt — B3; 326 THE OPENINGS 5. Kt -QB3, P —K3 was formerly treated incorrectly, viz. by 6.B-K2 or 6.KKt-—Kt5. After 6.B-—K2, B-—Ktd5 the pawn sacrifice by 7.Castles, BxKt; 8. PxB, KtxP; 9.B-—B3 gives White no advantage. There follows 9.... P—Q4 and now White can achieve nothing by 10. B-R3 because of 10....Q-—R4!. White’s best line is to play to regain the pawn by 10. KtxKt, PxKt; 11.BxKt, P xB; 12.Q—-Kt4 but after 12.... Castles; 13.Q~xP(K4), Q-Qé4 Black has at least an even game. The Knight’s Tour by 6. KKt—Kt5 (instead of 6. B —K2) is equally ineffective. There follows: GO .sies B - Kt5d! 7. P—-QR3! If 7. Kt—Q6,ch, then 7....K-K2; 8. B—-KB4, P-K4; 9. Kt—-B5,ch, K-Bl; 10. B-—KKt5 or Q2, P-—Q4! and Black has a very good game. Does B x Kt, ch This Knight has taken four moves to get to QB3 where, judged from the point of view of time, its position is worth only one tempo. Naturally three tempi are lost! It is fortunate for White that at the beginning of this variation (t.e. before 6. KKt — Kt5) he had an advantage of two tempi. Still the initiative passes over to Black. Bi sis P—Q4 9.PxP PxP 10. B — Q3! 10.B-—KKtd5 is bad because of the sacrificial combina- tion introduced by the author (see my Drethundert Schach- partien, 2nd edition, p. 44): 10.... Castles!; 11. B x Kt, Q x B; 12.QxP, R-K1, ch; 13. B-—K2, B—Kt5 with an irresistible attack. LO. ee Castles 11. Castles B — Kt5! In order to induce a loosening of White’s position. 12. P-B3 B-K3 The Bishop can, instead, be played to KKt3 via KR4. 13. B-KKt5 Q - Kt3, ch 14,K-Rl Kt — Q2 THE OPENINGS 327 15. P- B4 P-—B4 16. Q - B3 Q - B4 17. QR - K1 QR - K1 The game is approximately even but I somewhat prefer Black’s chances on account of his centre pawn. If White wishes to avoid playing P - Q4 on account of the considerations I have mentioned, then he can content himself with P -—Q8 and temporarily relinquish the opening up of the game. In this case he must develop his King’s Bishop on the flank. But 2. P-—KKt3 at once would be bad because of the reply 2....P-Q4. Thus 2. Kt-—QB3 must first be played. The play proceeds somewhat on the following lines: re Kt — QB3 3. P~KKt3 P-KKt3 4,B-Kt2 B -Kt2 5. KKt — K2 P—Q3 6. P—Q3 Kt — B3 7. Castles Castles 8. P-KR3 B — Q2 9.B-K3 R-Ktl 10. Q — Q2 followed by P —- B4 and P —- KKt4 with a good attack for White. CENTRE COUNTER GAME The Centre Counter Game (1. P—K4, P-—Q4) gives the second player a free open game, but the Queen comes out too soon and is sometimes in danger. If White does not play very incisively and does not make full use of each tempo, then Black can equalise and, if he is fortunate enough to be able to play Castles (QR)—which is here doubly effective since the Rook threatens White’s Queen—, then he can sometimes even obtain a dangerous attack. But by absolutely correct play White must obtain some advantage. After 1.P-—K4, P—Q4 White has to lose a tempo by 2.PxP, QxP, but this, however, he immediately regains by 328 THE OPENINGS 3. Kt-QB3. The Queen then goes—not to QI, as was for- merly played, for then White has actually won a tempo by the transaction—but to QR4. There follows: 4,P-Q4 White must immediately occupy the centre. From 4. B-QB4 followed by 5. P-—Q3, which, admittedly, is much safer, he can expect no advantage. On the other hand, the gambit move 4. P—QKté4, introduced by Mieses, is worthy of con- sideration. After 4....Q x KtP; 5. R —-Ktl, Q—Q3 White has &@ promising game. A isc P-K4 A quite logical attempt to maintain a balance in the centre. With 5.PxP? White would at once lose a tempo and so allow his opponent to obtain equality: 5.... B-QKt5!; 6. Kt — B3, B — Ktd; 7. B —- K2, Kt — QB3!; 8. Castles, KKt —- K2 and Black will regain the pawn with a good game. 5. Kt — B3! B—QKt5d If 5... B-KKtd; 6.B-—K2, Kt—QB3, then there follows 7. B-Q2, P xP (Black is now forced to lose a tempo; after 7.... Castles; 8. Kt xP, BxB; 9. KtxB he has lost a pawn without any compensation); 8. KtxP, KtxKt; 9. BxB, Kt —KB3; 10. Castles, Kt x B; 11. Q x Kt, B—K2; 12. R-Kl with advantage to White in tempo and position. 6. B — Q2 B—Ktd 7. B-K2 Up to now both sides have fully utilised each tempo but now Black has to give way; he must lose either a tempo or a pawn, eg. 7.... Kt -QB3; 8. P-QR3!, B x Kt (if 8.... B-Q3?, then 9. P-Kt4, Q—Kt3; 10. Kt —-Q5 or QR4, winning the Queen); 9.Bx B, Q-Q4; 10. Px P and Black has lost a pawn. Tete PxP This move loses a tempo. 8. Kt x P White now gains further tempi by attacks on the pieces his opponent has developed. 8... Q-K4 THE OPENINGS 329 If 8....BxB, then 9. Q xB, ch. 9, QKt — Ktd! BxB 10.Q xB B xB, ch 11.KxB Q x Q, ch 12,.KxQ At this moment White is no fewer than five tempi ahead. Very soon this gain of time is changed into one of force. | ee Kt —QR3 13. KR - Kl Castles 14. Kt x P, ch K -Ktl 15. Kt(R7) — B6, ch! Px Kt 16. Kt x P, ch K -Bl 17. Kt xR K x Kt and White won by his superiority in material (Tarrasch v. Mieses, Gothenburg tournament, 1920). After 1.P—K4, P-Q4; 2.PxP, QxP; 3. Kt-—QB3, Q—-QR4; 4. P—-Q4 Black can continue with 4.... Kt -KB3 (instead of 4....P-—K4). There follows: 5. Kt - B3 B-Ktd 6. P-KR3 B-R4 Also after 6....B x Kt; 7. Q xB White has the advantage. 7. P—-KkKt4 B - Kt3 8. Kt —-K5 Threatening to harass the Queen by Kt — B4. Biciles P—-B3 9. P-—KR4 QKt — Q2 10. Kt — B4 Q - B2 11. P-R65d B —K5 12. Kt xB Kt x Kt 13. Q -— B3 followed by B-B4 with an excellent game for White. This variation was first recommended by Dr. Lasker. If after 1. P—-K4, P-—Q4; 2. PxP Black plays 2.... Kt —-KB3, White must not attempt to maintain the pawn by 330 THE OPENINGS 3. P —QB4, for after 3....P-B3; 4. PxP?, KtxP; 5.P-—Q3 he is at a disadvantage on account of the backward pawn in the open Queen’s file. He should, rather, give back the pawn by 4. P-—Q4! (instead of 4. P x P?), Px P, after which, how- ever, the game is even. Much stronger than 3. P-QB4 is 3. P—Q4, with the con- tinuation 3....KtxP; 4.P—QB4, Kt—KB3, 5. Kt —KB3, B-Kt5d; 6.B-—-K2, P—K3. White has some advantage on account of his strong centre. CaRO-KANN DEFENCE This opening is characterised by the moves 1. P-K4, P-QB3. Naturally the move 1....P—QB3 cannot be con- sidered as theoretically correct since it does nothing towards development. In actual practice, however, as recent experi- ence has shown, it can quite well be played since it sets the first player the enormously difficult problem of maintaining and increasing his slight advantage from the opening, and in attempting to solve this problem it is very easy to go astray. By the most incisive and correct play, however, the first player should be able to secure a tangible advantage. After 1. P—K4, P -QB3; 2. P —-Q4, P — Q4 the three moves principally to be considered are 3.PxP, 3.P-—K5 and 3. Kt -QB3!. The exchange of pawns (3. P x P, P x P) is cer- tainly not the strongest line of attack, for by it White parts with his strong King’s pawn and Black with his Queen’s Bishop’s pawn which cramped his game. 3. P — K5 is even less recommendable than in the French Defence; it costs a tempo and allows the second player an easy development of his Queen’s Bishop at KB4 (3.... B-B4). After 4.B-Q3,BxB White’s King’s Bishop disappears and with it the greater part of his attacking chances. The best move is 3. Kt —-QB3, with the continuation: ee PxP Black has hardly any other move than this one which gives up the centre and presents White with a positional tempo. IH, THE OPENINGS 331 instead, 3.... Kt —- B3, then White can play 4. P —-K5 with even greater effect than in the French Defence; if in reply 4.... KKt — Q2, White can even continue with 5. P—K6. 4, KtxP B-—B4 White now generally continues with 5. Kt -Kt3. This retreat I consider to be faulty as by it White loses one of the tempi he has won. After 5....B—Kt3; 6. Kt —-B3, Kt —-Q2; 7. B —Q3, P—K3 White has certainly somewhat of an advantage but Black’s position is very solid, his pieces can easily be developed, and White has no targets for attack. If, instead of 6. Kt — B3, White plays 6. P -KR4, then after 6.... P—-KR3; 7. Kt — B3, Kt —-Q2; 8. B-Q3, Bx B; 9.QxB, KKt-—B3; 10. B-Q2, P-K3; 11. Castles (QR), B-Q3; 12. KR—-K1, BxKt; 13. P xB he has some weaknesses on the King’s side. The retreat of the Knight from K4 to KKt3 (5. Kt —Kt3), with which White nullifies part of his development, is obviously not entirely satisfactory. I therefore recommend the gambit move 5. B-—Q3 which I first suggested twenty years ago in my book Die moderne Schachpartie. After 5....Q xP; 6. Kt -KB3, Q-Q1; 7. Q—K2, P—K3 White is three tempi ahead and this advantage, from my own experience, I consider to outweigh the sacrifice of the pawn. This gambit continuation may very probably be the refutation of the Caro-Kann Defence. The gambit move 5. B-—Q3 can also be made if Black after 1.P—K4, P-QB3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt-QB3, PxP; 4. KtxP plays 4.... Kt —- B3 (instead of 4....B-B4). Up to now the move 4....Kt—B3 has been answered by either 5. Kt x Kt, ch (to which the best reply is 5.... KP x Kt), or 5. Kt — Kt3, in either case with the loss of a tempo. White’s slight advantage then generally soon disappears. After 1.P-K4, P-QB3; 2. P-Q4, P-Q4; 3. Kt —- QB3, PxP; 4. KtxP, B-B4 a good alternative to 5. B-Q3 is the move 5. Q-B3 which I have recently discovered. This move also avoids the loss of tempo inherent in 5. Kt — Kt3. If 5....P—K3, White has maintained an advantage of two tempi and develops his game by B - K3 followed by Castles. Black’s best reply to 5.Q-B3 is 5....BxKt (instead of 5... P—K3). After 6.QxB, Kt-—B3; 7.Q-—R4, P-K3 White has lost the two tempi he had gained but he has won 332 THE OPENINGS the ‘“Minor Exchange” (see p. 230). Time has, therefore, been converted into force. White can advantageously continue with B —-KKt5 followed by Castles. In the supplement to the Handbuch it is suggested that White after 5. Q — B3, Q — Q4; 6. B-—Q3, Bx Kt can make a very promising sacrifice of a pawn by 7.BxB; QxQP; 8. Kt—K2. He is, however, not forced to do so, for after 7.Q xB (instead of 7. B xB), Kt -B3; 8.QxQ, P x Q his game is to be preferred. He has a Bishop against a Knight and is still one tempo ahead in development. After 1.P—-K4, P-—QB3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3.PxP, PxP the move 4. P —- QB4 has recently been played, and very frequently by Dr. Alekhine. By this move White renews the pressure on the centre which he has just abandoned. But it leads to the isolation of White’s Queen’s pawn!—and in- deed the continuation 4.... Kt -KB3; 5. Kt -QB3, Kt — B3; 6. Kt - B3, B—Kt5 leads to nothing else than my defence to the Queen’s Gambit (see p. 343), but played by White. The threat contained in the Bishop move is best met by 7. B-K3 or 7.B-—K2. Generally, however, the faulty move 7.PxP is played. By it White further develops Black’s Knight and so makes him a present of a tempo. After 7. Px P?, KKt x P White hopes to obtain an advantage by 8. Q -— Kt3, attacking Black’s King’s Knight and Queen’s Knight’s pawn, but to this Black has quite a simple reply. After 8.... B x Kt; 9.PxB he guards the Knight by 9....P-—K3 (after which, although second player, he is a tempo ahead). If White now carries out the threat of the manceuvre started by 7. Px P? and captures the Queen’s Knight’s pawn (10.Q~xP), after which Black’s Queen’s Knight is attacked and the deadly move B —- QKt5 is threatened, so that Black’s whole house appears to be tumbling about his ears, Black coolly repels the attack by 10.... Kt x P!. White has then nothing better than simpli- fying the game by 11. B-Kt5,ch, KtxB; 12.Q~x Kt, ch (or first 12. Q-B6, ch, K—K2), Q-Q2; 13. QxQ, ch, K x Q, after which Black has slightly the better game since he is ahead in development and has the better pawn position. After 1.P-—K4, P-QB3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4; 3.PxP, THE OPENINGS 333 PxP; 4. P-QB4, Kt -KB3; 5. Kt -QB3, Kt — B3 the move 6. B—Kt5 was played by Botwinnik in two of the games of his recent match with Flohr. It was recommended twenty years ago by the well-known theoretician Dr. Krause in a long article in the Deutsches Wochenschach. By this move Black’s Queen’s pawn is attacked. To guard it by 6.... P—K3 is, on principle, bad because of the imprisonment of the Queen’s Bishop, but here its real disadvantage is that after 7. Px P, PxP; 8. Bx Kt Black is forced to recapture with the pawn and so break up his pawn position. The counter-attack 6.... Kt -K5 (instead of 6....P—K3) is not good, as after 7. Kt x Kt, Px Kt; 8. P-—Q5 Black’s Knight is driven back to Ktl and the pawn at his K5 is exposed. Therefore Black is forced to play 6....PxP (instead of 6....P-—K3 or 6.... Kt —K5) and thus give up the centre. After 7. P-—Q5 the position is the same, only with colours reversed, as in the follow- ing variation of the Queen’s Gambit: 1.P-—Q4, P-—Q4; 2. P-QB4, P- K3, 3. Kt -QB3, P- QB4!; 4. BP x P, KP x P; 5. P x P?, P— Q5! (see p. 343). There follows: Teves Kt —- QR4! This is better than 7.... Kt —K4 (as played by Flohr) to which the best reply is 8. B — B4 (instead of 8. Q — Q4, as played by Botwinnik). 8. BxP Not as in the analogous Queen’s Gambit variation 8. P —-QKt4 because of 8....PxP,e.p.; 9. P x P, P—-K3! and White cannot continue (as Black does in that variation) with 10. B — Kt5, ch, B-Q2; 11.BxB,ch, QxB; 12.R x Kt because Black by 12.... B- Kt5 wins back the piece (if 13.Q-—R1?, then 13... Q — B2) and after 13. R —R4, B x Kt, ch is a pawn ahead with advantage in position and development. Ss vies Kt xB 9. Q — R4, ch B — Q2 10. Q x Kt White has now an advantage in time and space. The more important is that in space produced by the isolated Queen’s pawn which commands the centre and is here, as usual, very strong. The obvious move 10.... R— Bl is bad on account of the continuation 11. Q — K2! (much stronger than 11. Q — Kt3), P—K3; 12.R-Ql1, B-Ktd; 13.PxP, PxP; 14. Kt —B3, 334 THE OPENINGS followed by Kt-—K5, with a strong attack. Black must, therefore, postpone the move R-B1 and first develop his King’s side, but after 10.... P-KKt3!; 11. Kt —-B3, B —Kt2; 12. Castles (KR), Castles; 13. KR-—K1 White has a pro- nounced advantage. He controls five ranks and Black only three. Further, he is at the moment two tempi ahead and, if Black attempts to regain one of them by 15.... R — Bl, there follows the double attack 16. Q -QKt4 which wins a pawn. To sum up—the move 6. B — Kt5 is very good and gives White the advantage. After 1.P-—-K4, P—-QB3; 2.P-Q4, P-Q4 the infre- quently played move 3. P-—KB3 is also good. White can permit himself this blocking move since Black has made a similar one on the Queen’s side. Inreply, 3....P xP; 4.PxP, P — K4 (threatening Q —R5, ch) would be faulty since White by the pawn sacrifice 5. Kt-KB3, PxP; 6. B-QB4, fol- lowed by Castles, would obtain a rapid development and a good attack. If, however, 3....P—K3, then White can offer a promising gambit by either 4. B-—K3, PxP; 5. Kt- Q2 or 4. B-K3, PxP; 5. PxP, Q-R5, ch; 6. P-Kt3, QxKP; 7.Q-—K2!. If 7....QxR?, then 8. B—Kt2, QxP; 9.BxP, ch, winning the Queen. After 1. P—-K4, P—QB3 the move 2. P - QB4 is, perhaps, even stronger than the usual 2. P-Q4. By it White always gets a fine game—after 2....P-—Q4 by 3.BPxP, PxP; 4,.PxP, QxP; 5. Kt-QB3, Q-—QR4; 6. P—Q4, as in the Centre Counter Game, or after 2...P—-K3 by 3.P-Q4, P—Q4; 4. Kt-QB3, B-—Kt5; 5.P-—K5, as in the French Defence. kkk * ALEKHINE’S DEFENCE This opening, which is characterised by the moves 1. P — K4, Kt — KB3, is based on the subtle idea of enticing White’s pawns forward in order then successfully to attack them. This idea is shown exceptionally clearly in the very logical main varia- THE OPENINGS 335 tion in which White allows himself to be enticed into advancing all four centre pawns: 1. P-—K4 Kt —-KB3 2.P-—K5 Kt — Q4 3. P-QB4 Kt — Kt3 4,P-—Q4 P-—Q3 5. P — B4? Too much of a good thing! Five consecutive pawn moves in the Opening! hs cae PxP 6. BP xP Kt — B3 7.B-K3 Not 7. Kt -KB3 because of 7.... B — Kt5. Titus B-B4 We sce that Black is ahead in development. 8. Kt —-QB3 P-—K3 9.B-K2 Q -— Q2 10. Kt — B3 Castles 11. Castles P-—B3 12.PxP PxP and Black has the better game, eg. 13. P-—Q5, Kt —K4; 14. B x Kt, Kt x Kt, ch; 15. Rx Kt, RP xB; 16.P xP, BxP; 17. QxQ, ch, BxQ; 18. Rx P, B-Kt2 and the end-game is in Black’s favour, although momentarily he is a pawn down. However, White can play with more foresight and more attention to development. Then he will obtain some advan- tage. After 1. P—-K4, Kt-KB3; 2. P—K5, Kt — Q4 the line of play which offers him most chances is the following: 3. P—Q4 P—Q3 4. Kt—-KB3 B -— Kt! 5. B —-K2 Kt — QB3 6. Castles! P-—K3 7. P—B4 Kt — Kt3 8.PxP This exchange is, admittedly, inconsistent; the exchange of the King’s pawn for the Queen’s Bishop’s (not the Queen’s) costs 336 THE OPENINGS two tempi. But it is difficult for White to maintain the point K5 for any length of time. 8. .... PxP! 9. P—Q5! This advance gives White the advantage, eg. 9.... B x Kt; 10. BxB, Kt xK4?; 11.PxP, PxP; 12.BxP, R-QKtl; 13. B—QR6 and White maintains the pawn he has won. kkk QUEEN’S GAMBIT The Queen’s Gambit is characterised by the moves 1. P — Q4, P-Q4; 2.P-QB4. Strictly speaking, it is not a gambit— White offers nothing, since Black cannot maintain the gambit pawn, eg. 2...PxP; 3.P-K3, P-QKt4; 4. P-QR4, P-—QB3; 5.PxP, PxP; 6. Q-B3 and White wins a piece. The defences most frequently played are the so-called ‘‘Ortho- dox”’ (1. P -Q4, P —- Q4; 2.P - QB4, P — K3, 3. Kt — QB3, Kt - KB3) and the Czech (1. P—-Q4, P—Q4; 2. P— QB4, P — QB3). Since the gambit pawn cannot be maintained it is pointless to accept the “gambit” by playing 2....P xP, for by that move Black merely gives up the centre and loses a tempo. After 2...PxP; 3.P—-K3, P-K4!; 4.BxP (4.PxP?, QxQ, ch would be bad for White), Px P; 5.P xP, B-Q3 White has somewhat of an advantage on account of his centre pawn. In order to prevent 3....P—K4, the move 3. Kt —KB3 is gener- ally played, eg. 1. P-Q4, P-Q4; 2. P-QB4, PxP; 3. Kt - KB3: ee P-—QB4 4. P—Q5 is not good. After 4....P—K3; 5.P—K4, PxP; 6. Px P, Kt -KB3; 7. Bx P, B-Q3 I prefer Black’s game in accordance with the principle I have laid down: “Better a mobile pawn majority on a flank than a blocked passed pawn in the centre”. ee P-K3 5.BxP Kt —- KB3 6. Castles Kt — B3 THE OPENINGS 337 7.Kt-—B3 PxP 8.PxP B—K2 9. B-K3 Castles 10. R-Bl Q —R4 11. Q —K2 R-Ql 12. KR -Ql B —Q2 13. P—Q5 with the somewhat better game for White. * The most popular defence is the “Orthodox” (1. P —Q4, P-Q4; 2.P-QB4, P-K3; 3. Kt-QB3, Kt-—KB3). Its disadvantage is that Black’s Queen’s Bishop is imprisoned whereas after 4. B —-Kt5! White’s is wellin play. The further continuation is: re B-K2 5.P-—K3 QKt — Q2 6. Kt — B3 Castles 7.R-Bl P —B3 In this position White has the decidedly better game, for his pieces have greater freedom than Black’s, while the latter has not yet succeeded in making the move P —-QB4, the freeing move for Black in the Queen’s Gambit. (If 7.... P —-B4?, then 8.BPxP, KPxP; 9.PxP, KtxP; 10.BxKt, BxB; 11. Kt x P with advantage to White.) 8. B-Q3 PxP 9.BxP Kt — Q4 10.BxB Q xB 11. Castles Kt x Kt 12. R x Kt In reply to 12. PxKt the move 12....P—K4 would be stronger. | are P-K4 13. Kt x P? Kt x Kt 14,.Px Kt QxP and the game has become approximately even. An at- tempt to occupy the only open file with the major pieces by playing 15. Q — Q2 is frustrated by 15....B—B4!; 16. R - Ql, Q - B3 followed by QR -—Q1. White might, perhaps, cause his Zz 340 THE OPENINGS This fine pawn sacrifice leads to equality. 10. Kt xP Not 10. P xP because of 10.... Kt — B4 followed by Kt — R5. LO wstiz QKt x Kt 11.Px Kt Kt x Kt! After 11....B-—K3; 12. P-—QR3!, BxkKt,ch; 13.PxB, Castles; 14. Q —Kt2!, Kt -Kt3; 15. P—KB4 White maintains some advantage. 12. Px Kt B —QR6 13. R-QIl B-K3 14. B-QB4 BxB 15. Q x QB QxP 16. B — B4 Q —- QKt4 17.QxQ PxQ and the end-game is approximately even. * After 1.P-Q4, P-Q4; 2. P-QB4, P—K3; 3. Kt - QB3, Kt-KB3; 4.B-Kt5, QKt-Q2; 5.P-K3, P-B3; 6. Kt -B3, Q—R4 White’s best reply to this sortie by the Queen is my new move 7. Q —Kt3! by which he forestalls the attack on his QB3. There follows: yore Kt — K5 8. B —- KB4 is even better. By the exchange of pawns White is playing for the gain of a tempo. 8. .... KtxB 9. Kt x Kt KPxP 10. B-—Q3 with a good game for White. x* But White need not have anything to do with the doubtful complications ‘of the Cambridge Springs variation but, as soon as the sortie of the Queen to R4 is threatened, he can play P x P, a course that I have for a long time recommended as the simplest and best. By so doing he gets the somewhat better THE OPENINGS 341 game, eg. 1. P-Q4, P— Q4; 2. P-QB4, P —K3; 3. Kt — QB3, Kt —-KB3; 4. B —-Kt5, QKt —- Q2; 5. P-K3, P-B3; 6. Px P!, KP xP. White has now the better game for his development is easy and natural whereas Black’s Queen’s Knight is not on the right path and will never reach a good post. White can continue with B-Q3 and KKt-—K2, followed by Kt — Kt3, Q — B2 and Castles (QR)—a line of play due to Alekhine—and will maintain the somewhat better game. ¥ The Czech Defence (1. P -Q4, P—-Q4; 2. P —-QB4, P - QB3) is also very popular. Theoretically it cannot be completely satisfactory since in the Queen’s Gambit the correct place for Black’s Queen’s Bishop’s pawn is QB4. In actual practice the defence can quite well be played and generally leads almost to equality. The most usual lines of play are: (1) 3. Kt —KB3 Kt -B3 4, Kt—B3 PxP 5. P-QR4 B-B4 6. Kt —K5 After 6.P-—K3 Black gets a good game by Maréchal’s manoeuvre of Kt — R3 followed by Kt —- QKt5. Cesccs QKt — Q2 7. Kt x P(B4) Q — B2 Not 7....P—K3 because of 8. B—Kt5. 8. P—-KKt3 P—K4 9.PxP Kt xP 10. B — B4 KKt — Q2 11. Kt x Kt Kt x Kt 12.Q-—Q4 P—B3 13. B —-Kt2 B-—K2 14. R—QBIl with the somewhat better game for White. (2) 3. Kt -KB3 Kt -B3 4,P—K3 P-K3 Here either 4...B-—B4 or 4.... Kt-K5 (followed by 342 THE OPENINGS 5.... P-KB4 — the so-called Stonewall Defence) can be played. 5. Kt —B3 QKt — Q2 6. B-Q3 B -Q3 7. Castles Or, still better, 7. P—K4 at once. / pare Castles 8. P-—K4 PxKP 8... PxBP; 9.BxP, P—K4! is better. After 8....PxKP White captures the centre and gets some advantage. Only by a subsequent P —-QB4 can Black obtain equality. 9. Kt xP Kt x Kt 10. B x Kt Kt — B3 11. B-B2 and Black is threatened with a strong King’s side attack. * Against the Czech Defence (1. P—Q4, P—Q4; 2. P-QB4, P—QB3) I can recommend, at any rate from the practical standpoint, the not very popular attack 3. Kt — QB3, although I can do so only for the reason that the best defence against it is unknown to the majority of players. They play 3.... Kt — B3 (in reply to which 4. B — Kt5 is very strong) or make other inferior moves. After 1.P-—Q4, P-—Q4; 2. P-—QB4, P-—QB3; 3. Kt-—QB3 the best defence is Winawer’s move, 3.... P—K4, a kind of gambit. If 4.QPxP, then 4....P-—Q5 and Black wins back the pawn by Q-R4,ch. Similarly in the variation 4. BP xP, BP xP; 5.PxP, P-Q5, e.¢:: 4,BPxP BP xP 5.PxP 5. Kt -B3, P-K5; 6. Kt -K5, Kt — QB3! also leads only to equality. Di ans P-—Q5 6. Kt — K4 Q — R4, ch 7. Kt —Q2 In order after 7....QxKP to threaten the Queen and at the same time the Queen’s pawn by 8. KKt—B3, Q—Q3; 9.Kt—K4. Black avoids this by: : oe Kt — QB3! THE OPENINGS 343 If the moves 4. BP x P, BP x P have been omitted, then there follows here 6.... Kt—Q2; 7. Kt—B3, KtxP; 8. Kt~xP, Kt x P with an even game. 8. Kt — B3 KKt —- K2 9. P-KKt3 Kt — Kt3 10. B —- Kt2 KKt x P with an even game. The isolated Queen’s pawn is strong. In conclusion, I wish to discuss briefly the defence 3.... P —- QB4—Tarrasch’s Defence, as it is called. This I hold to be the best, although I must add that I am almost completely alone in holding that opinion. After this defence had been used for years and almost to the exclusion of all others, it has for some time been out of fashion. It is based upon the un- deniably correct idea that in the Queen’s Gambit P —-QBé4 is the freeing move for Black and must, therefore, be made as soon as possible. (That it is playable as early as the second move is possible; at all events the contrary has not yet been conclusively demonstrated.) By this defence Black gets a fine free game with his pieces, but an isolated Queen’s pawn. The attack favoured at present against this defence is the Rubinstein variation (as it is called), introduced by Schlechter. 1.P-Q4, P—Q4; 2. P-QB4, P-K3; 3. Kt -QB3, P —- QB4!: 4.BPxP This is considered to be the best continuation. The simpler move 4, P—K3, which is probably more correct, leads after 4.... Kt-KB3; 5. Kt-B3, Kt-—B3 to the symmetrical “Normal Position” of the Queen’s Gambit. er KP xP A possibility here is the new von Hennig move 4.... BP x P by which Black sacrifices a pawn. After 5.QxP, Kt —QB3; 6.Q-Ql1, PxP; 7.QxP, B-—K3 or 5. Q-Ré4, ch!, B-Q2; 6.QxQP, PxP; 7.QxQP, Kt—KB3; 8. Q-—QI1 Black has an advantage in development in exchange for the pawn. 5. Kt — B3! The variation 5.PxP, P-Q5!; 6. Kt-—R4 (if 6. Kt —K4, then 6....B—B4 and Black wins back the pawn with advan- tage), P—-QKt4!!; 7. PxP, e.p., Px P (threatening to win the 344 THE OPENINGS Knight by P-QKt4); 8. P—QKt3 leads to complications which are generally recognised as resulting in favour of Black. If, instead of playing the purely defensive move 8. P —- QKt3, White seeks to prevent the loss of the Knight by making the developing move 8. P —K3?, then 8.... B-— Kt5, ch; 9. B —- Q2, BxB,ch; 10.QxB, RxKt. Admittedly White can win back the exchange by 11. B—Kt5, ch, B-Q2; 12.BxR, B x Bso that after 13.Q~x Por 13. P x Phe has the advantage in material of Rook and two pawns against Bishop and Knight. But his separated pawns are not worth much, and the superi- ority of the two minor pieces over the Rook gives Black the advantage. Diieehs Kt — QB3! This is Schlechter’s move. Its object is the strengthening of the attack against Black’s Queen’s pawn which is to be isolated. Gide Kt — B3 The move 6.... P —- B5, recently suggested and played, I cannot recommend. It seems to me that the advance of the Bishop’s pawn, by which Black abandons his attack on the centre, is without motive and not good. The counter-advance P —-K4 will soon follow and then White will have the better game, e.g. 6... P-B5; 7. B-Kt2, B-QKt5 (this development of the Bishop is unavoidable—K2 is required for the King’s Knight which is to be played there to guard the other one against an attack by Kt -K5); 8. Castles, KKt -K2; 9. Kt — K5 (threat- ening 10. Kt x Kt, Px Kt; 11. P—K4 after which Black, who can never play P x P without breaking up his pawn position, will be subjected to a constant pressure on his Queen’s pawn). If 9....B-K83 (to parry this threat), then after the plaus- ible continuation 10. KtxKt, KtxKt; 11. P-K4!, PxP; 12. P-Q5, Bx Kt; 13. Px Kt!, B-B3; 14.PxP, R-QKtl; 15. Bx P Black has lost an important pawn and White has a decisive advantage. 7. B-~Kt2 B—-K2 Here 7....P xP; 8. KKt x P, B- QB4; 9. Kt - Kt3, B - QKtd or Kt3 also gives Black a satisfactory game. 8. Castles Castles 9,.PxP THE OPENINGS 345 Intending to reply to 9....BxP with 10. Kt-QR4, B-K2; 11. B-—K3. This is the latest—and, in the general opinion, the best — “refutation” of my defence. The variation is worked out as follows: 11....Kt-—K5; 12. Kt -Q4, Kt x Kt; 13.QBxKt, B-K3; 14.R-Bl1, Q-R4; 15. P-QR3 (if 15. P— B3, then 15.... Kt -Q3!), QR-—Bl. After this “refuta- tion” Black has a really good game. But I play a gambit and, instead of 9.... B x P, make an even stronger move 9....P-—Q5!. After 10. Kt-—QR4, B-B4 Black exerts strong pressure on his opponent’s game. He con- tinues his development with Kt-K5 and B-B3. White’s Knight is very badly posted at the edge of the board. I hold the opinion that Black has the better game (see Game No. 5, p. 376). The future will decide who has erred in estimating this defence —I or the chess world. kkk QUEEN’s Pawn GAME This is the title given to all games which are opened with 1. P-Q4, P-—Q4 and not continued with 2.P-QB4. The Queen’s Pawn Game does not set such difficult problems as the Queen’s Gambit. The positions frequently become symmetrical. The game sometimes transposes into the Queen’s Gambit and particularly into what Dr. Krause has called the “loosened” Queen’s Gambit. 1.P-Q4 P-Q4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt —-KB3 The move 2.... P—QB4 is also very good. By it Black plays the Queen’s Gambit a move behind. After 3. P— B4 the game is transposed into Tarrasch’s Defence to the Queen’s Gambit. As a general rule, in the Queen’s Pawn Opening Black can reply to almost any second move by White with 2.... P- QB4. 3. P — B4 P — Ba! 3.... P—- B3 transposes into the Czech Defence to the Queen’s Gambit. 4,BPxP PxP 5. Q x P! QxP 6. Kt — B3 Q — QR4! Better than making White a present of a tempo by 6.... Q x Q; 346 THE OPENINGS 7.KtxQ. After 6.... Q-QR4 Black will win back by Kt — B3 the tempo he has lost. 7.P-K4 Kt -B3 Or first 7.... B- Q2. 8. B-QKt5 B-Q2 9, Q-R4! QxQ 10.BxQ with an even game. Black can continue with P-K4, P-K3 or P-—KkKt3. After 1. P-Q4, P-Q4; 2. Kt -KB3, Kt -KB3; 3. P -— B4, P—B4; 4.BPxP, PxP the move 5. KtxP is inferior to 5.Q xP, eg.: 5. Kt x P Kt x P 6. P-K4 Kt — KB3! Much better than 6.... Kt-—Kt5. After 6.... Kt -KB3 Black threatens to play P - K4 and so prevent White from castling. If 7. Kt —-QB3, then 7....P-K4; 8. KKt—Kt5? (Kt — B3 is better), P -QR3! and the Knight has no good retreat for, if 9. Kt — R3, there follows 9.... P—QKt4. 7. B—Ktd5, ch White attempts to prevent P-K4 and to advance his own King’s pawn. Ls apa B -Q2 8. P —-K5? 8. Kt -QB3, P—K4; 9. Kt — B3 is better. 8 és BxB 9.KtxB Q x Q, ch 10.K xQ Kt — Q4 11. QKt -— B3 Kt — QB3! 12. Kt x Kt Castles! and Black gets the advantage. This refutation of White’s attack is due to the author. THE OPENINGS 347 In the following line of play White follows quite a different plan. 1.P-—Q4 P—-Q4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt —-KB3 3. P-K3 An apparently very tame continuation but not without danger- ous possibilities. ere P-K3 Here, as in other cases, it is a very good policy to avoid the imprisonment of the Queen’s Bishop. It can be developed very well at KKt5 or KB4. 4.B-Q3 P -B4 With this move Black breaks away from a symmetrical develop- ment of the two forces and endeavours to obtain an advantage. White’s tame play invites this course. 5. P-QKt3 Lo prevent P —- Bd Bi sads Kt — B3 6. Castles B -—Q3 7. B-—Kt2 Castles 8. Kt —-K5 The obvious development by 8. QKt-—Q2? is completely refuted by the fine counter-move 8....Q-—K2!. By that move Black threatens either to advance in the centre by P — K4 or else to play P xP and then (after White’s reply of P xP) B-—-R6 followed by the exchange of his Bishop for White’s Queen’s Bishop which is important both for attack and for the defence of the Queen’s side. Bs. sxe Q - B2! 9.P-KB4 PxP! 10.PxP Kt —- QKtd and Black by exchanging the Knight for White’s King’s Bishop robs his opponent of all hope of attack. If after 1.P-Q4, P-Q4; 2. Kt-KB3, Kt -KB3 White plays 3. B —B4, there follows: ee P — B4 348 THE OPENINGS 3.... P -K3 shuts in the Queen’s Bishop and is not so good; there follows: 4.P-—-K3, B-K2; 5. QKt-—Q2, Castles; 6. B-Q3, QKt-Q2; 7.Q-—-K2, P-—B4 and White has the somewhat freer game 4.P-K3 Q — Kt3! 5.Q-Bl 5. PxP, QxKtP; 6. B-—K5 is better. Bi: cies Kt — B3 6. P-—B3 B—B4! and Black has the better game. Dutcu DEFENCE Like all other lines of play in which the King’s Bishop’s pawn is moved early, the Dutch Defence (characterised by the move 1.... P—KBé4 in reply to 1. P—Q4) is not correct. The strongest reply is Staunton’s Gambit, 2. P-—K4. After 2.... Px P there follows: 3. Kt -QB3 Kt —- KB3 4.B-KKt5 P-B3 If 4...P-Q4?, then 5.BxKt, KPxB; 6.Q-R85, ch, followed by 7.QxQP. After 4....P—B3 White must not play to win back the gambit pawn by 5.BxKt?, KP xB; 6. Kt x P because after 6.... P —Q4 Black has the better game on account of his two Bishops. Even stronger than 6.... P — Q4, however, is Steinitz’s move 6.... Q — Kt3!, after which White’s Queen’s Knight’s pawn cannot be protected at all comfortably. (Even after 7.Q-K2 Black can capture the pawn.) White must, therefore, instead of 5. Bx Kt?, make Lasker’s move, 5. P-B3!, and play for an attack which after 5.... PxP?; 6. KtxP, P—K3; 7. B—Q3 would be very strong. After 1.P-—Q4, P—KB4 White can also get the better game by Steinitz’s move, 2. P— KKt3, e.g.: ae Kt - KB3 3. B-Kt2 P-K3 THE OPENINGS 349 4. Kt -KB3 P —Q4 5. Castles B - Q3 6. P- B4 P—-B3 7. Kt —B3 QKt — Q2 8. Q—-B2 Kt —K5 9. K-RIl Q -— B3 10. B-— B4 BxB 11.PxB Q-R3 12. P—K3 and White has the somewhat better game. xkx«* Brrp’s OPENING As first player one may risk the advance of the King’s Bishop’s pawn (1. P—KBé4), nevertheless Black always ob- tains the somewhat better game. The second player’s best course is to follow the lines of White’s play against the Dutch Defence, viz. 1....P—Q4 followed by 2....P—KKt3 and 3.... B—Kt2. It is also possible for Black to reply to 1. P -KB4 with the gambit move 1.... P—K4 (From Gambit) correspond- ing to White’s 2. P-—K4 against the Dutch Defence. The continuationis 2. P x P, P—Q3; 3.PxP,BxP; 4. Kt —KB3. Black must then play either 4.... Kt—-KB3 (not the older move 4.... Kt -KR3 which is refuted by 5. P-Q4, Kt — Kt5; 6. Q-Q3!) or 4.... P—KKt4 (Lasker’s move) which leads to equality. After 4....P—KKt4 the continuation is 5. P-Q4, P—Kt5d, 6. Kt-K5, BxKt; 7.PxB, QxQ,ch; 8. KxQ, Kt — QB3, etc. kkk INDIAN DEFENCE The Indian Defence, 1. P-—Q4, Kt—KB3, is now very popular. It aims at avoiding the dreaded Queen’s Gambit. However, since Black neglects to occupy the centre, White easily obtains an advantage in space. In addition, Black nearly always has to exchange his King’s Bishop for the opposing Queen’s Knight. Thus White really has an advan- tage from the very beginning. After 1. P—-Q4, Kt -KB3 the most usual line of play at present is: 2. P—-QB4 350 THE OPENINGS 2. Kt -KB3 is not so good since by 2....P—Q4! Black can at once obtain complete equality. Deets P-—K3 Now 2.... P—Qé4 does not lead so clearly to equality. Cer- tainly, after 3.PxP?, QxP!; 4. Kt-—QB3, Q-QR4; 5. Kt -B3, Kt -QB3; 6. P-K3, P-—K4; 7. B-Kt5, B-Q2 Black has an even game, with a position similar to one occur- ring in the Centre Counter Game. Also after 3.PxP?, KtxP; 4.P—K4, Kt-KB3; 5.B-Q3!, P—K4!; 6. PxP, Kt —Kt5; 7. Kt -KB3, Kt -QB3 the game is even, as White cannot guard the pawn at his K5 by 8. B-—KBé4 on account of 8.... Kt-Kt5. But after the move 3. Kt —-QB3! (better than 3.PxP) Black is in a dilemma. After 3....P—K3 he will be playing the ‘‘Orthodox’”’ defence to the Queen’s Gambit or after 3....P—B3 the Czech defence, neither of which is completely satisfactory. It is for this reason that 2. P -QB4is superior to 2. Kt —KB3. 3. Kt -QB3 B—-Ktd Now after the simple developing moves Kt-—B3, B-Kt5, P —K3, etc., White has quite a good game. Even after the quietest move, 4. P— K3 (recommended by Rubinstein), with the continuation 4....P—B4; 5.Kt-—K2, PxP; 6.PxP, P-Q4; 7.P-QR3, BxKt,ch (if 7....B-—K2, then 8. P — B5!); 8. Kt x B, White, with his two Bishops, has a good game. The Indian Defence, introduced by Louis Paulsen, is certainly not correct. But the most usual attacking moves by White, viz. 4. Q — B2, 4.Q-Kt3and 4. P-—QR3, are, however, just those ones which are not to be recommended: (1) After 4. Q-—B2 Black equalises the game by 4.... P—Q¢4! since White must guard the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn by play- ing P—K3, unless he is prepared to give it up for good or exchange it. (2) After 4.Q-—Kt3, P—B4; 5.PxP, Kt-—B3; 6. Kt — B3, Kt-K5; 7. B-Q2, KtxQBP; 8.Q-B2, P—B4 or P-Q4 Black has some counter-play since White has lost time with his Queen. — (3) Samisch’s exchanging move, 4. P-—QR3, with the con- tinuation 4....Bx Kt, ch; 5. P xB, seems to me to have been refuted by Eliskases in a recent game against Dr. Alekhine THE OPENINGS 351 in the Hastings tournament of Christmas, 1933. The con- tinuation was: Diavsces P - QKt3 This seems to me to be very good. It is directed against the threatened occupation of the centre. P-—Q4 followed by P — B4 may also be quite good. 6. P-B3 Preparing to occupy the centre by P—K4. The simpler de- velopment by 6. P—K3 gives White nothing for after 6.... B-Kt2 Black has an advantage of two tempi and White’s Queen’s Bishop is shut in. O..28% P -Q4 This is Eliskases’ new move. As it is directed against White’s P — K4 it is absolutely logical and crosses White’s plan. 7. B~Kt5 B - Kt2 This seems to me to be much better than B — R3 as played by Eliskases. That move is inconsequent and allows White to play P-—K4. After 7....B-—Kt2 a possible continuation is: 8. Q — B2 QKt — Q2 Preventing 9.P-—K4 because of the reply 9....P xP; 10.PxP, BxP. (8....P-KR3; 9.BxKt, QxB, with the same object, is also worth consideration.) After 8.... QKt —Q2 White has already the inferior game for he is two tempi behind, his King’s side is undeveloped, and the blocking pawn at his KBs3 is no ornament to his position. 9.P-K3 White has to postpone playing P — K4. ener Q -K2 10. B-Q3 In order to play P — K4 at last. 10} ges P - K4! and Black has stolen a march on his opponent. He has the attack in the centre and the better game. 352 THE OPENINGS Black can follow the example of Louis Paulsen and after 1,P-Q4, Kt-KB3; 2.P-QB4 continue with the King’s Fianchetto: 2....P—-KKt3; 3. Kt-—QB3, B-—Kt2. Here I must warn you (as White) against playing another pawn to the centre—a third by 4. P-—K4 and, worse, a fourth by 5. P-B4. In the Opening this is too much of a good thing. After 4. P-—K4, Castles; 5. Kt-—B3, P-Q3; 6. B-K2, QKt — Q2; 7. Castles, P—K4 White has achieved nothing in particular, indeed his King’s Bishop is badly placed. It would be much better posted at KKt2 to command a completely open diagonal, eg. 4. P—KKt3! (instead of 4. P-K4), Castles; 5. B—Kt2, P—Q3; 6. Kt —-B3, QKt — Q2; 7. Castles, P-K4; 8. P-—KR3 (in order to play B—K3 without being annoyed by Kt-—Kt5), R-K1; 9. B-K3, P-—KR3 (if now 10. Q —- Q2, threatening Bx P, Black can play 10.... K — R2); 10. Q — B2 and White has the better development and position. Black will be forced to give up the centre by P x P and later on, in the middle game, White will advance his King’s pawn and his King’s Bishop’s to an attack. ¥ After 1.P-Q4, Kt-—KB3 White can continue with 2. Kt -QB3. Black must then prevent the threatened P —- K4 by playing 2....P—Q4, and then White by 3. B—Kt5 can offer his opponent the opportunity of a transposition into the French Defence by 3....P—K3; 4.P-K4. Naturally 3.... B — B4, the normal developing move demanded by the situa- tion, is better. It is then not recommendable for White to play for possession of the centre by 4. P-B3, P-B3!; 5. P—K4, PxP; 6.BxKt, KP xB; 7. Px P, B—Kt3 for the Bishop is too important. In this position Black has at least an even game. There is equality of tempi; White certainly controls more space and has occupied the centre with two pawns, but these can be subjected to a frontal attack along the open files and to attacks from the flanks by the two Bishops’ pawns. Finally, Black has the two Bishops. Instead of 4. P — B3, therefore, White must proceed with simple development by 4. P —-K3 and B — Q3, with an even game. Black will continue with P —K3 and, sooner or later, with P — B4 and Kt — B3. THE OPENINGS 353 After 1.P-Q4, Kt-—KB3; 2.P-QB4 the interesting gambit move 2.... P —K4, introducing the Budapest variation, is also possible. The best continuation is: 3.PxP Kt — Kt5 4. B—B4! Kt — QB3 5. Kt -KB3 B — Kt5, ch! 6. Kt — B3! If 6. QKt — Q2, then Black wins back the pawn by 6.... Q —-K2. 6: 626 Q —K2 7.Q-—Q5 B x Kt, ch 8.PxB Q —-R6 9.R-BIl P — B3! Not 9.... Q x P because of 10. P — R3. 10.PxP Kt x P(B3) 11. Q —Q2 P —Q3 12. Kt — Q4 In reply to the simple developing move 12. P—K3 Black can play to win the pawn at White’s QB4 by 12.... B —K3 followed by Kt — QR4 and, if necessary, Q — B4. 12. .... Castles 13. P — B3! B-—Q2 14, P-—K4 QR -KI1 15. B—K2 White now completes his development by castling, and Black has no attack. His only chance lies in White’s broken-up pawns. White’s game is to be preferred. On the other hand, after the usual continuation 4. P-—K4 (instead of 4. B-—B4), KtxKP; 5.P-B4, KKt-B3! it is Black who has an advantage for White’s game is far too much loosened by the four pawn moves. R&tTr’s OPENING A very difficult subject. The move 1. Kt -KB3 was played by Zukertort, who, however, after 1.... P—Q4, immediately transposed into the Queen’s Pawn Game by 2.P-—Q4. Réti, who died in his prime a few years ago, utilised 1. Kt -KB3 2A 354 THE OPENINGS as a preliminary to a profound—but, to my mind, a completely faulty—system. After 1.Kt-KB3, P-—Q4 he played 2. P —-B4 and after the usual reply 2.... P—QB3 he held back his centre pawns, developed his Bishops on the flanks and allowed his opponent to occupy the centre with pawns which he afterwards attacked, as, for example, in the famous game Réti v. Dr. Lasker (New York tournament, 1924), viz.: 1, Kt -KB3 P — Q4 2. P - B4 P —-QB3 3. P-QKt3 B-—B4 If Black shuts in his Queen’s Bishop by playing 3.... P — K3, then White regularly gets an advantage. This Réti demon- strated in several] fine games played in that tournament. 4,.P-Kt3 Kt — B3 5. B~KKt2 P —-K3! 6. B —-Kt2 QKt — Q2 7. Castles B —Q3 8. P-Q3 Castles 9, QKt — Q2 Pp—K4 10.PxP PxP 11. R-Bl Q —-K2 12. R-B2 P — QR: ! 13. P-QR4 P—-R3 Making a retreat for his Queen’s Bishop, if attacked by Kt — R4. 14.Q-Rl A very original position for the Queen. i: eee KR-K1 15. KR —-Bl White commands the only open file but here this is not of much moment since Black’s King’s Bishop commands the only possible square of entry for the Rooks, viz. Black’s QB2. Had he so wished, Black could long ago have opposed a Rook on that file but he has other plans, viz. to advance his pawns in the centre. Are these pawns now weak, as Réti thought, or strong, as the classical school has always maintained? 16: csi B-R2 So that after he plays P —K65 the Bishop will not be attacked THE OPENINGS 355 by Kt - Q4 or Kt-—R4. Now Black threatens a strong attack by 16.....P-—K5; 17. Kt -Q4, P -K6. 16. Kt - Bl Kt — B4! Now Réti decided to sacrifice the Exchange (17. R x Kt, B x R; 18. Kt x P), a course which enabled him to put up the longest resistance. But by so doing he admitted that his judgment was faulty—the centre pawns were not weak but strong. Before this sacrifice of the Exchange—and, naturally, also after it—Black had the superior game. Nevertheless, some of Black’s moves in this game call for a critical examination. After 1. Kt-KB3, P-—Q4; 2. P-B4, P —QB3 White by 3. P —Q4! can transform the game into the Czech defence to the Queen's Gambit. How has it come about that the first player can dictate to his opponent the defence he is to adopt?—and, in addition, one which cannot be considered as completely satisfactory from the theoretical point of view. The second player must have made a mistake—and it is the move 2....P—QB3. Instead of that move, 2....P—Q5 certainly commits him more but is very probably more correct. Let us see: 1. Kt -KB3, P-—Q4; 2. P— B4, P-Q5: 3. P—-QKt4 P —-QB4 Or P—KB3 at once. Above all Black must endeavour to maintain the pawn at his Q5. 4. B-—Kt2 P — B3! This move was first suggested by the author. 5. P—-K3 P—K4 and Black maintains the pawn which cramps White’s game, eg. 6. KtPxP, BxP; 7.PxP, PxP; 8. P-—Q3, Kt-—K2 with quite a good game for Black. The isolated Queen’s pawn is strong. The new move P —-KB3 as a preliminary to P —-K4 is calculated to restore the move P —-Q5 to favour (see Game No. 10, p. 407). But even Black’s first move invites criticism. After the normal move 1. Kt—-KB3, why should Black by playing 1.... P-—Qé4 endeavour to take the initiative? That is the affair of the first player and not of the second! He must dance to his opponent’s tune, follow his opponent’s playing—and a solo performance is, 356 THE OPENINGS to say the least, rather challenging. All the tension in the game between Réti and Dr. Lasker and in all games at Réti’s Opening arises solely from the unjustifiably defiant attitude of the second player. If he is content to choose the same system as the first player and from the very beginning simply to copy his moves, then there arises just such a “game” as I have given on p. 237 as a “horrible example,” with a similar development of the two forces without their ever coming into contact—a draw without a fight. You may say, ‘But that would be cowardice on the part of the second player! He must accept the challenge!’’ Oh, no! That is a complete reversal of the actual state of things! Itis the affair of the first player— and not the second—to bring about complications in the Opening, to give the game a character, and, if he fails to do so, if he holds back his centre pawns and thus makes a contest impossible, if from the very beginning he expects the plan of campaign to be dictated by his opponent, then it simply serves him right if the latter pays him back in his own coin and answers stupidity with stupidity. ENGLISH OPENING In this opening (characterised by the move 1. P -QB4) the state of affairs is similar to that just mentioned in the section on Réti’s Opening. If Black has the audacity to take the initiative at once by 1.... P—K4, then immediately complica- tions arise, e.g. after 2. P- KKt3 (Carls’ move) or 2. Kt —-KB3, P-—K5? or 2.Kt-KB3, Kt-—QB3!; 3. Kt-B3, Kt—-B3; 4,.P—Q4, PxP; 5. KtxP, B-Kt5!. This last variation leads, after 6. B-—Kt5, BxKt,ch; 7.PxB, Kt—K4, to interesting games. 1....P—K4 as a reply to 1. P—QB¢4 is not strictly correct or, at least, is too challenging. White’s best line against it is the Fianchetto variation of the Sicilian Defence with a move ahead and it suddenly becomes clear that this is a move of real importance, for White in this variation can play P—Q4 much more easily than Black can in the Sicilian Defence. Thus White gets somewhat of an advantage, e.g: : 1. P-QB4 P-K4 2. Kt -QB3 THE OPENINGS 357 Or P —-KKt3 at once, as played by Carls. y aro Kt -KB3 3. P-KKt3 P-Q4 Black is carrying on the attack as White does against the Sicilian Defence—but here it is not good. He should content himself with P —-Q3 and P —- KKt3. 4,PxP Kt xP 5. B-Kt2 B -K3 6. Kt —- B3 Kt —QB3 7. Castles Not 7. P —Q4 on account of 7.... B~QKt5 Toes B-K2 8. P-Q4! In the Sicilian Defence Black, instead of being able to make this strong advance, has to content himself with the defensive move P — Q3. Bi ieee PxP 9. Kt — QKt5! followed by 10.QKtxQP. White has the somewhat better game. His King’s pawn is stronger than Black’s Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. Instead of 9. Kt -QKt5!, White can play—also with advant- age—9. KtxP, eg. 9....QKtxKt; 10.QxKt, B-B3; 11. Q-R4, ch!, P-B3 (if 11.... B-Q2, then 12. Q-K4, ch, with a decided advantage); 12. Ktx Kt, Bx Kt; 13. R~QI, threatening to win the Bishop by P - K4. * As the best defence to the English Opening I recommend the system P-—K3 followed by P—-Q4 and P-QB4, which, in fact, Black can well play against many openings. White, if he wishes, can play P ~Q4 and transpose the game into the Queen’s Gambit with Tarrasch’s Defence. 358 THE OPENINGS If, however, Black shows a becoming modesty and has no ambition to ‘‘refute” the move 1. P —- QB4, if he is satisfied to play in the same fashion as his opponent and simply copies his moves, then there occur those correct games with a symmetrical flank development of all four Bishops which are now so common and are the horror of all true friends of the noble game. x*xkexkx* PART 5 GAMES GAME No. 1 LAYED in the London tournament, 1922. White: Dr. Alekhine; Black: Yates. 1. P-QB4 Kt —-KB3 2.P—Q4 P-K3 3. Kt —QB3 P -~Q4 The English Opening with a transposition into the ““Orthodox”’ defence to the Queen’s Gambit. Regarding the opening, see p. 337. 4. Kt —- B3 B —-K2 5. B-Kt5 Castles I maintain that already Black has the inferior position since his Queen’s Bishop is shut in while White’s is well in play. White has only to make the developing moves that are ready to hand to maintain and increase his advantage. 6. P-K3 QKt — Q2 One ugly move after another. Really good moves are almost always, I might say, esthetically pleasing. White has made only such. 7.R-BIl P-B3 8. Q-B2 R-KIl This huddling together of the pieces into a crowd is always a bad sign. 9. B-Q3 PxP Black has only a choice of unfavourable moves. If he plays P — QR3 with the object of obtaining some counter-play on the Queen’s side by P x P, P— Kt4 and P — B4, then White brings this plan to naught by playing Px P. Admittedly, that move frees Black’s Queen’s Bishop but his Queen’s Knight is badly posted and in general White has much more freedom for his pieces. 359 360 GAMES One must avoid the very first little step from the path of theory, the very first little mistake—in this case the shutting in of the Queen’s Bishop—otherwise one is soon on the downward path that leads to mate. Admittedly, one’s opponent must play very well. 10..BxP Kt — Q4 11. Kt -K4 The simple exchange B xB is also very good although it develops Black’s Queen. But even then White, with an advantage in time and space, has an excellent game. 1 are P —-KB4? This pawn move renders Black’s game quite indefensible. It makes the King’s pawn backward and, above all, weakens Black’s K4 where an enemy Knight soon establishes itself. Particularly in cramped positions must you guard against such weakening moves. They are almost invariably pawn moves. 1],...B xB; 12. either Kt x B, Kt-Bl was correct although Black would have been in a bad enough position even then. 12.BxB QxB 13. QKt — Q2 P —- QKt4? The same mistake on the other flank! Black’s QB4 is weakened beyond repair and White obtains command of the only open file. An attempt at development by QKt-B3, B-Q2, QR-Bl and P-B4 was better, although after QKt —-B3 White’s Knight would immediately play to K5. Even at this stage there were no satisfactory moves; it was merely a question of choosing the least disadvantageous. 14. Bx Kt Very well judged! The Bishop is the stronger piece as a rule but it is not stronger than a Knight which is posted in the centre. Moreover, Black’s Knights must be removed so that when White’s Knight gets to K5 or QB5 it cannot be exchanged. ree BP xB 15. Castles P —-QR4 16. Kt — Kt3! White must make this move at once or else Black will prevent it by P-R5. a 16. .... P-R5 17. Kt — Bd Kt x Kt 18. Q x Kt! GAMES 361 Not P x Kt since weak points or “holes” in the opptynent’s position must be occupied by pieces and not by pawns.’ Be sides, after P x Kt? Black could repair the weakness at nis K4 by playing P - K4. 18. .... QxQ 19.RxQ P—Kt5 White has now a decided advantage in force, space and time. In force, since he has a Knight which, as it will immediately take up the classical position in the centre, supported by a pawn and unassailable, is stronger than a Bishop. In space, since he commands the only open file. In time, since he has developed two pieces and Black none at all (apart from castling, which I don’t count here since both players have done it). 20. KR - Bl B-R3 21. Kt -K5 Black could neutralise some of White’s advantage if he could now oppose a Rook at QBI. But after 21....QR-Bl; 22.RxR, RxR; 23.RxR,ch, BxR White by playing 24. Kt — B6, with the double threat of Kt —K7, ch, or Kt x P, would win a pawn and thus convert his advantage in space into one in force. 4 ape KR - Ktl 22. P~ B3 ow it is a question of bringing the King into play. V4) nee P-Kt6 23. P-QR3 ot P x P which would open a file for the hostile King’s Rook. 23... P-R3 If Black opposes and exchanges the Rooks, White brings his King to QKt4 and his Knight to QB5 and thus wins the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. 24. K —- B2 K — R2 25. P— R4 To prevent interference—by P —Kt4—in his plan of playing the King to KB4. BOs Size R-KBI 26. K — Kt3 KR — QKtl 362 GAMES Riack ‘is completely crippled and can do absolutely nothing. 27. R - B7 At last the Rook gets in on the seventh rank, a move which we, from our study of the typical attacks of the Middle Game, alr ady know to be decisive. >) B-Kt4 28. R(B1) ~ Bs! In order by the attack on the Bishop to bring about the doubling of the Rooks on the seventh rank. It threatens, for example, 29.R—-K7, R-K1; 30.R-KB7 followed by R(B5) — B7. 4. ane B-R3 29. R(B5) — B6 With the same idea. If now R-QBI?, then RxB wins a piece. 20. sss R-Kl 30. K — B4 R — B7 is just as good, as the doubling of the Rooks cannot be prevented. 30 .... K - Ktl 31. P- Rd B-B8 32. P —-Kt3 B-R3 The Bishop can accomplish absolutely nothing since the enemy pawns are all on black squares. In reply to B-K7 White would guard the Bishop’s pawn by playing the Knight wa KKt6 to KR4 and then enter with his King at K5, which would at least lead to the gain of the King’s pawn. 33. R -B7 K —R2 34. R(B6) - B7 White has at last seeured the doubling of his Rooks on the seventh rank. This doubling nearly always leads to a catas- trophe. 34, .... R -KKtl Threatening to win the Exchange by Kt — B6, ch. 35. .... K~-RI GAMES 363 Now follows a brilliant problem-like finish. 36. Kt — B6 KR -KBI Naturally, P x Kt is out of the question because of R —R7, mate. 37. R x P! R x Kt 38. K — K5! The King is a strong piece! Here it wins the Rook for, whether the latter retreats to Bl or is guarded by R-—KBI, there follows mate in two moves R — R7, ch and R(B7) — Kt7, mate. Black resigned. * GAME No. 2 Played in the London tournament, 1883. White: Tchigorin; Black: Zukertort. 1. P—K4 P—K4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt — QB3 3. B-Kt5 Kt — B3 4. Castles Kt xP 5. P -Q4 B-—K2 6. P-Q5 With reference to the opening see p. 279. The pawn move is unusual but not bad. The usual move is Q —K2 but Px P is also quite good. Os. ase: Kt — Q3 This is the best reply. If now the Bishop retreats, then P —- K5 will follow. 7.Bx Kt This move at once completely spoils White’s game for by it White exchanges his best attacking piece for a Knight and, moreover, develops his opponent who utilises the tempo to free his Queen’s Bishop. By 7. Kt-B3! White, certainly, would allow the unfavourable exchange of his Bishop for a Knight but would advance his development and obtain some attacking chances. eee QP xB 364 GAMES Even at this stage White cannot obtain equality. After 8. KtxP, PxP; 9.QxP, B-—K3 followed by Castles Black has the considerably better development and two Bishops. Baise P —B3! An excellent move by which Black simply and effectively safeguards the King’s pawn, his hope for the future. To try for the same end by P—K5 would be much inferior because the pawn is much stronger at K4 than at K5 where it would soon be exchanged by P-B3. Black has now a compact pawn majority on the King’s side and in the following play demon- strates in exemplary fashion how to put such a majority to its best use. 9,.PxP Again a bad move since by it White again develops his oppo- nent and forces the opposing Queen’s Bishop to a highly dangerous attacking line. 9.Q-Q5, with the continuation 9....PxP; 10.QxP, ch, B—Q2, was better but even then Black would still have had the better game. 9. .... BxP Black has now obtained a superiority in force, space and time. In force, since he has the two Bishops; in space, since he com- mands four ranks while White is limited to three and the fourth is empty, or, to put it another way, Black has a pawn at K4 against a pawn at QKt2. Finally, in time, since he has de- veloped three pieces while on White’s side only two developing moves can be seen. The most important of these advantages is the command of the centre. 10. B-K3 Kt —-B3 would threaten to exchange Knight for Bishop by Kt — Q5, but Black would prevent this by Kt — B4. TOs ak Castles 11. QKt — Q2 The Knight is striving to reach the weak point at Black’s QB4. Black’s Queen’s side is broken up, the pawns are isolated, and weak points have been created at his QB4, QB3, QR4 and QR3, while the White position has no weak point at all. Natur- ally this is a disadvantage for Black but it is, however, much GAMES 365 more than compensated for by the advantages in position previously indicated. | eer Kt — B2! Black’s plan is the logical outcome of the pawn configuration. It is to advance the King’s and King’s Bishop’s pawns for a King’s side attack. The first move towards the execution of this plan was P — B3, the second is the Knight’s move which guards the King’s pawn and so prepares the advance of the Bishop’s pawn. 12. Q—-K2 P—KB4 Threatening to win the Bishop at once by P — B5. 13. Kt — Kt3 P — Bd! 14. B- B5 P-—K5 The two pawns now throw white’s game into disorder and soon Cluaic sit th + ~, Can points hitherto absent. 15. KKt —Q4 Exchange by B xB was better, Black’s simplest reply being to recapture the Bishop. ED esjvs P — B6! The pawn cannot be captured without immediate loss: 16.PxP?, BxB; 17. Kt—Ke6! (if KtxB, then Q-Kt4, ch wins the Knight), Q-B3; 18. either KtxB, Q-—Kt3, ch; 19. K - Rl, P x Pand Black wins, since not only mate at Kt2 is threatened but also the gain of the Queen by discovered check. 16. Q —Kt5 Attacks the Bishop—but the biter is bitten. 1G ssi Q - Bl! A move with several objects. It guards the Bishop and, at the same time, threatens to win the exchange by B-R3, but, above all, to mate in a few moves by 17.... Q —Kt5; 18. P —-Kt3 Q-R6, etc. Now occur all the typical combinations with which we become familiar when studying in the Middle Game section the attacks with a pawn at KB6. 17. KR - Ql 366 GAMES Making room for the Queen to go to KB1 and prevent the mate after 17....Q—Kt5; 18. P-Kt3, Q -R6. ly are B-R3 18. Q-R4 Thus Black has headed off the Queen from KBI and now one might suppose that he could conclude his attack by playing Q-Kt5. But that move would be a terrible mistake. White would reply by capturing the most important pawn (Kt x P!) for Black would be unable to capture the Knight as his Queen would then be en prise. Such masked self-pins can easily be overlooked. 18. .... Kt — Kt4! A strong move that decides the game! Now not only is Q-Kt5 threatene—_with mate to follow—but also 19.... Kt-—R6,ch; 20.K-Rl, 2x ch; 21.K xP, Q-Kt5, ch; 22. KK -R1, KtxP, mate. White’s Wing stands quite alone, unsupported by a single piece now that the Kin? .Winjalt, the best protection of the castled position, has been driven away. 19. Kt xP In no other way can mate be averted. The advance of the pawn has won a piece. 19. .... Px Kt Now the King’s Bishop, which has been en prise for several moves, still cannot be captured for there would follow: 20.... Kt -—R6,ch; 21.K-Rl, PxP,ch; 22.KxP, Q-Kt2, ch; 23. K x Kt, Q-B6, ch; 24. K —R4, R-B5, ch, winning the Queen. 20. R —-Q7 P x P! With the win of the piece the game is to all intents and purposes over. Black finishes it with powerful and elegant play. 21.RxB Kt — R6, ch 22. K xP Kt — B5, ch Black cannot win the Queen as in the variation given in the — to his 19th move since now Queen or Rook can interpose at K4., 23. K - B3 Q - R6, ch 24, K -K4 B — Kt2, ch GAMES 367 Even better was 24.... B-—Q6, ch!; 25. K-Q4 (or 25. P xB, Q xP, ch; 26. K — K5, R — B4, mate), QR — QI, ch; 26. K - B3, B -Kt4, ch; 27. R -K3!, Kt - Q4, ch; 28. K -Q2, Kt xR, ch, and wins. 25. K —Q4 Kt — K3, ch 26. K — B4 If R x Kt, then R — B5, ch. 26 cts R — B65, ch 27. Kt — Q4 Kt xB 28. K x Kt Q — R4, ch 29. K — B4 R x Kt, ch and White resigned. If Kx R, then Q-Kt5 or R5, ch wins the Queen. GAME No. 3 Played in the Leipzig tournament, 1894. White: Dr. Tarrasch; Black: T. von Scheve. 1, P-Q4 P-—Q4 2. P-~QB4 P-K3 3. Kt -QB3 Kt —-KB3 Regarding this defence see p. 337. 4, Kt-—B3 Good enough, as is also B-B4. B-Kt5is the strongest move. By sien B -K2 5. B-B4 P-B3 Now the pawns at Black’s K3 and QB3 block his pieces and give him a cramped game. In the Queen’s Gambit the proper place for Black’s Queen’s Bishop’s pawn is QB4. Black should, therefore, have castled at once and then endeavoured to play the move P — QB4. 6. P-K3 QKt - Q2 7,.P-KR3 Opening for the excellently posted Queen’s Bishop a retreat at KR2 so that Black cannot force the exchange of that piece by playing Kt—R4. Here, contrary to the general rule, it is 368 GAMES advantageous to offer a tempo to this end, to sacrifice time for & gain in space. y Carer Kt — K5 The decisive mistake. After the exchange which follows, the pawn at Black’s K5 is weak and, if it is to be maintained, requires support by P-KB4. Then, however, it is attacked again by P-—B3 and Black must exchange and so open the King’s Knight’s file for White who then obtains with his major pieces and his Queen’s Bishop a combined and irresistible attack on Black’s KKt2. It very rarely happens that it is possible as early as the 8th move to make such a detailed plan, leading almost to mate, and then to carry it out logically and without any deviation right up to the catastrophe twenty moves later. For this reason the game is all the more in- structive. 8. Kt x Kt P x Kt 9. Kt — Q2 B-Kt5 Had Black realised the full extent of White’s plan, he would have kept this Bishop for the better protection of his KKt2 and played P —-KB4 at once. 10. P-QR3 B x Kt, ch 11.QxB Castles Tf Black plays to castle on the Queen’s side, then White’s Queen’s Bishop in the open diagonal will be very dangerous. 12.Q -B2 P—-KB4 If Black avoids this move, he loses the pawn at his K5. 13. B-Q6 If White castles at once, then Black can free his game a little by Q — K2 followed by P — K4. Loeesies R-KI It would have been better to play the Rook at once to B2 to guard the point KKt2. 14, Castles Kt — B3 15. B-K5 B -Q2 This Bishop cuts a sorry figure, the result of the blocking moves P —K3 and P —- QB3. 16. P- B3 GAMES 369 Once the plan is clear-cut, the game is very easy to understand and to play. This is generally the case when one has a definite plan, for that acts as a thread to lead one through the labyrinth of combinations. 16. .... PxP 17.PxP P-QKt4 Black tries to obtain some sort of counter-attack—but in vain. 18. R—Ktl R-—KBI In order to protect himself against Q — Kt2 by R — B2. 19. R — Q2! Preparing to double Rooks. To move the King’s Bishop would not help the attack in the least; that piece cannot be used in the execution of the plan and remains to the end of the game on its original square—a rare occurrence. 19. .... R-B2 20. QR — Kt2 P—QR4 21. Q—B2 Now the Queen must strengthen the attack and approach to give mate. She is aiming for KR4 and KR6. 7A ee Kt — Kl To prevent this. 22. R — Ktd Behind the broad back of the Rook the Queen gets to KR4. lf Black plays to prevent this by 22....P—R3, he creates a new weakness that after 23. R-Kt6, K—R2; 24. Q—Kt3, Q — K2 will be exploited by the typical Rook sacrifice at KR6. All pawn moves loosen a position. Py ERE Q —- K2 23. Q —R4 Threatening to play Q — R6 followed by R — R5 with decisive effect. > Tae Kt — B3 24. Q —R6 With this move the intended concentration against Black’s KKt2 is completed. The threat is 25.BxKt, QxB; 2B 370 GAMES 26.QxQ, RxQ; 27.R xP, ch, winning the Bishop, which piece Black, therefore, guards by his next move. If 24.... P ~ Kt3, then, naturally, White wins by 25. R xP, ch, P xR; 26. Rx P, ch, R-Kt2; 27. Bx Kt. 24. .... R —R2 25. B —Q6! Driving the Queen away from the protection of the King’s Knight’s pawn, which is thus at last captured according to plan. Much weaker would have been the continuation 25. B x Kt, Qx B; 26. Q x Q! (not R x P, ch? because of Q x R) followed by Rx P, ch, by which White would win only two pawns. Whenever possible, you must endeavour to obtain the greatest advantage, though, of course, in some circum- stances you must be content with a small one. 25. oo. Q xB 26. R xP, ch K —Bl If K-—Rl, then Q ~ P, ch! followed by R-Kt8, mate. Now we have to find the right check. After 27. R—Kt8, ch? the King gets into comparative safety at K2. After 27. R xR, ch?, K xR; 28. R —-Kt7, ch, K —-K1; 29. Q x Kt, Q - Bl White has nothing better than the exchange of Queens and the gain of a second pawn. But more is to be got from this position. 27. Rx P, ch! K —K2 28. R xR, ch KxR 29. R — Kt7, ch K -K1 30. Q x Kt and Black resigned, for, if he played Q —-B1, White would win the Queen by Q — Kt6, ch (that was why White captured the Rook’s pawn at move 27), followed by R — Kt8. GAME No. 4 Played in the Leipzig tournament, 1894. White: Dr. Tarrasch; Black: Schlechter. 1,P—K4 P-K4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt — QB3 3. B-Kti P-Q3 GAMES 371 For the merits (or, rather, demerits) of the Steinitz Defence please refer back to p. 291. 4,.P-Q4 B —Q2 This is better than P x P by which Black gives up the centre. After the text-move White has to force him to do so. It is, however, an interesting fact that Steinitz maintained that after 4,...PxP; 5. Kt xP the game is even. The whole theory of the centre was first enunciated by the author. 5. Kt — B3 Kt —B3 6. Castles B -K2 7.R-KIl This forces Black to give up the centre—see p. 291. This can also be attained by B x Kt followed by Q — Q3, which is, per- haps, even better. Dates Kt x QP This develops White’s Queen. 7....PxP; 8. Kt xP, Castles is better. 8. Kt x Kt Px Kt 9.B xB, ch QxB 10.QxP Castles (KR) White’s advantage is apparently inconsiderable: it is an ad- vantage in space, a somewhat freer game. White is in posses- sion of four ranks, Black of only three, while one rank (the 5th) is free. In addition, Black’s Bishop is cramped by his Queen’s pawn. To put it briefly: a pawn at K4 against one at Q3 is all that was to be obtained from the variation. But this particular game provides an exceptionally instructive example of how such an apparently insignificant advantage is to be maintained methodically and exploited to bring about victory. Through- out the whole of the game White has the greater freedom and Black never succeeds in posting pieces beyond his third rank for any length of time. 11. P-QKt3 This flank development of the Queen’s Bishop in the Ruy Lopez was introduced by me. Here it is very effective and on it is based the entire plan of attack, the objective of which is Black’s KKt2. 1: a KR +K1 372 GAMES If Kt -Kt5 or K1, with the object of playing B-B3, then White replies with Kt -Q5 and exchanges the Knight for the Bishop. 12. B —-Kt2 B-Bl Kt — Q5 was already threatened. 13. QR - Ql Q -B3 To prevent P — K5, a move that is always in the air when there is the formation of pawn at K4 v. pawn at Q3. 14, R-Q3 R -K3 Guarding against the possibility that later on White might, perhaps, be able to sacrifice his Queen by Q x Kt. 15. QR —-K3 QR -K1 Black has completely developed his game. The positions are almost symmetrical and the attack appears to have come to a full stop. One cannot see how White is to increase his slight advantage; in fact many good players would not even realise that White has this slight advantage. It consists, in the first place, in the pawn at K4 to which the pawn at Q3 is no positional equivalent and, in the second, in the Bishop at QK12 which commends a completely open diagonal, whereas its opponent at KB1 has to be content with an extremely modest range of action, the result of its original imprisonment by P - Q3. 16. P-KR3 To prevent Kt — Ktd 16. .... Q -Kt3 Here or later Black could attempt to oppose his Bishop in the long diagonal by playing P-KKt3 and B-Kt2. But after the exchange of Bishops the ‘‘hole’’ at his KB3 would be- come dangerous, e.g. 16....P—-KKt3; 17. Kt-Q5, B-Kt2; 18. P—~QB4, Kt -R4; 19. Q-Q2, BxB; 20.QxB with the threat of P - KKt4 followed by Kt — B6, ch. 17. Q - Q3 P-—B3 There are two moves by which Black can obtain equality, v7. P—Q4 and P-—KB4. Both are, however, systematically pre- vented by White in the following play. At this moment Black GAMES 373 threatens to simplify the game by P ~ Q4, followed, if White takes the pawn, by exchange of Rooks. 18. Kt — R4 Q - B2 19. P—QB4 This move immediately dispels the danger. 1 ree Kt — Q2 Black intends to play P - KB3 and so block the line of attack of White’s Bishop. 20. K - Rl The ideas underlying this and the next six moves are obscure and without further explanation would remain so to the student. White has a quite definite plan of attack which I shall explain in the note to his next move. In carrying it out, however, he must all the time be on his guard lest Black should break the ever-tightening blockade by playing P — Q4, by which move the Queen would be brought to bear on White’s KKt3 and the Bishop on his QB5. Moreover, after White plays KP x P the Rooks will be exchanged. In view of this possibility and as a preliminary to the coming attack along the King’s Knight’s file, the King is better posted at RI. The exchange by Kt -B4 would be very welcome to White, for he would obtain a clear majority of pawns on the King's side and this would be bound to strengthen his attack very appreciably. 20) 5 sis P-B3 21. Q — B2 The first step in the plan of attack is to play the Knight via QB3, K2 and Q4 to KB5. But in the execution of this plan there are great difficulties to be overcome. White could at once have played Kt — B3 but the Queen’s move is better, for, in the first place, after the Knight’s move Black by Kt — B4 would force the Queen to B2 and, in the second, the Queen’s move keeps Black completely in the dark as to White’s plan and, indeed, whether he even has a plan and is not merely moving here and there. yA ee Kt — K4 Black cannot do much; his most effective moves have been 374 GAMES prevented and, in addition, White stands ready to exploit at once any new weakness wherever Black may create it. 22. Kt — B3 Kt - B2 Black has realised the danger and hinders the further progress of the Knight to K2, for now after that move Black would free himself by P —- KB4, followed, if Px P, by RxR. 23. P -KKt4 Simply and effectively preventing P - K B4 and again threaten- ing Kt - K2. If White’s King were still at Ktl, then the attempt to gain freedom by 23....P—-Q4; 24. KPxP, RxR followed by Q — Kt6, ch (as sketched in the note to move 20) would be successful. 7 ee Q -R4 Black again hinders the Knight’s move, this time by the attack on the Rook at K1, which White now moves out of danger. 24. R -QI Q - Kt3 Now one would think that the Knight could at last continue its journey—but this is still not possible, for after Kt —K2 Black attacks the King’s pawn by Kt —Kt4 and thus forces the Knight to go back. 25. P -KR4! Kt —- K4 26. R —- Kt3 Kt — B2 27. P— B3 The King’s pawn must first be guarded before the Knight can carry out its decisive manoeuvre. This Black has now no effective way of preventing. 7s aerre Kt -Rl 28. Kt —- K2 At last! Now, however, the attack proceeds with giant strides. t. Si wk Q — B2 If the Queen goes to B7, she is lost after B-Q4. At B2 she has the Rook at White’s KKt3 under observation. 29. R(Q1) - KKtl GAMES 375 Not Kt — Q4 at once because of P — Q4 with an attack on that Rook! Now, however, by merely preparatory—one might almost say defensive—moves White has completed a surprising right-wheel and pawns and pieces stand ready for the attack on one point—Black’s KKt2! 29. .... Q-B2 30. Kt -Q4 R(K3) —-K2 Black’s pieces have huddled together like a flock of sheep into whose midst the wolf is about to leap. 31. P-Kt5 PxP Further resistance is impossible. 32. R xP Threatening Kt — B5 with a fourfold attack on Black’s KKt2. Oo, suis P—-KKt3 33. Kt — B5 R -—K4 Black offers to give up the Exchange which, after 33.... R — Q2, White, if he had nothing better, could win by 34. Q -B3, B-Kt2; 35.KtxB. If 33....R—K8, then White wins by 34. Q -B3, R-K4; 35. P-B4. 34. P— B4 Stronger than capturing the Rook. If 34....RxP, then 35. Q — B3 wins. 34, .... Rx Kt 35.PxR B~ Kt2 36. PxP and Black resigned. If 36....PxP, then White wins by 37.B xB, QxB; 38. P—KB5, threatening to win the Queen by RxP. An alternative is to play R x P immediately after the exchange of Bishops, for, although after 38. R x P, Kt x R; 39. Rx Kt, R-K8, ch; 40. K-R2, R-—K7, ch Black has escaped into an end-game, White, after the further moves 41.QxR, QR, forces the exchange of Queens by Q ~ KKt2. after which his extra pawn gives him an easily won pawn ending. * 376 GAMES GAME No. 5 Played by correspondence in the International Correspond- ence Chess Association’s championship tournament for 1930. White: F. Batik (Czechoslovakia); Black: Dr. Dyckhoff (Munich). 1. P-Q4 P-—Q4 2. P-QB4 P-K3 This move shuts in the Queen’s Bishop and deserves con- demnation—for the moment. Black’s next move, however, completely justifies it. 3. Kt -QB3 P —QB4! This forces either the imprisonment of White’s Queen’s Bishop or the release of Black’s, so that in either case the disadvantage of 2.... P-K3 is removed. 4.BPxP KP xP ; 5. Kt — B3 Kt — QB3 6. P—-KKt3 Kt — B3 7. B-Kt2 B-K2 8. Castles Castles Regarding the opening see p. 344. 9.PxP This move, which is held to be the best, proves to be a decisive mistake. White gives up the centre and his Queen’s Knight is forced into a very unfavourable position. De aves P —Q5! This gambit move, first suggested by me, is the logical ex- ploitation of the mistake. The correctness of this gambit is conclusively proved by the evidence of this game. White's extra pawn is no compensation for his disadvantage in position. As I have already remarked in the section on the “General Theory of the Opening’? one may well be a pawn down in the Opening if one has advantages in other directions but to be a pawn up in the Opening at the cost of position and de- velopment is very dangerous. Better a good position than a superiority in material! 10. Kt -QR4 GAMES 377 If Kt -QKt5, then B xP and Black has equality in material and the better position. 10s sags B — B4! The best move, preparatory to Kt-—K5 which, if played at once, would be bad for after 11. KtxP, QxKt; 12.QxQ, Kt xQ; 13. Bx Kt, Kt xP, ch White would have an advan- tage in every respect. Black’s plan of deployment is Kt -K5, B —- B3, R -K1, Q — K2 and QR-QI1. He has then no attack but a strong position enabling him to exert pressure. 11. Kt —-R4 Here there are other moves, e.g. P-QR3 (to be followed by P —-QKt4 or P—K3), P—QKt4 at once, P-—K3 at once or Q — Kt3, but with none of them does White get a good game. If 11.P-QR3, then 11....P-—Q6 (threatening to win the Exchange by P x P followed by B — Q6), followed, if 12. P x P, by 12....QxP (threatening to win the Exchange by QxQ followed by B-B7). If White plays 13.QxQ, then after 13....B x Q; 14. R-K1, B - B7 Black regains the gambit pawn with advantage. If (instead of 11. P—QR3) 11. P-QKt4, which appears very strong, then Black gets an advantage by 11.... P — Q6!, again threatening to win the Exchange by P x P followed by B-Q6. 11. P—K3 is also unfavourable for White because after 11....PxP; 12.QxQ! Black wins back his pawn with advantage by 12....P xP, ch, while, if 12. Bx P?, (instead of 12.QxQ) he wins the Exchange by 12....QxQ followed by 13....B-—B7. That demonstrates how badly the Knight is placed at QR4. So does the following variation: 11. Q-Kt3, Q-Q2; 12.R-Q1?, B-K3; 13.Q-B2, Kt- QKt5 and the Knight at QR¢4 is lost. |g aes B~K5 This makes the King’s pawn backward but already the situa- tion is difficult. Even after the best continuation 12. B xB, Kt xB; 13. Kt-B5, KtxQBP; 14. Kt x Kt, Bx Kt Black’s game is to be preferred since, as a result of his strong centre, he controls more space. | eer B-Q4 13. Kt —- Bd 378 GAMES If, to get rid of the backward pawn, White plays 13. P-K4 (as Bogoljubow did against Maréczy in the Sliac tournament, 1932), then 13....B-B5; 14. R-B2 (14. R-K1 is very un. favourable to White because of the attack 14.... Kt -QKt5, 15. B- Bl, P-—Q6), P—KKt3! and White’s second Knight is also without a move. Black can also get a good game by playing (instead of P - KKt3!) either B — Kt4 or even P —- QKt4, but Kt — Q2 (as played by Maréczy) is not good. 13. .... B-K3 Black has now made four moves in succession with this Bishop, certainly a departure from Theory, but the first was a good developing move and the others were forced, either directly or indirectly. Obviously, under compulsion all principles have to be disregarded. Even stronger than the text-move, however, was 13.... B — B5, which would give the second player chances of recovering the gambit pawn by attacking the Knight at QR4. If, in reply, 14. B — Q2 (in order to reply to B —- Kt4 with P -QKt4 and so maintain the gambit pawn), then 14.... P—KKt3!; 15. KtxB, ch, QxKt; 16.R—K1, Kt—Q4! and White’s King’s pawn is backward, while Black, whose isolated Queen’s pawn is very effective, has the superior position in the King’s file. 14. Kt x B, ch Q x Kt 15. B-Kt5 15. B-B4 would be parried by 15....B-—B5; 16. B-—Q6, Q-—K6, ch. But, instead of the text-move, White should advance his backward King’s pawn by P — K4, although even then Black, after Kt -Q2, would have a fine game. TD saves B -—B5! 16. R-K1 P—-KR3 17. Bx Kt QxB 18. P-—Kt3 If P —- K3, then QR — Q]1 is very strong; equally-so, after P — K4, is P—Q6. . LO: aies B-R3 19. Q — Q2 KR -K1 20. Kt — Kt2 For ten moves this Knight has been standing aloof. In the GAMES 379 meantime Black has been continually strengthening his game and he now begins to exert a strong pressure along the King’s file, to which two pawns largely contribute—Black’s isolated Queen’s pawn and White’s backward King’s pawn. ys | aver R — K6! If now Kt —Q1, then Black attacks the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn by R-Ké4 and afterwards increases the pressure along the King’s file by doubling his Rooks. 21. QR -Bl QR -K1 22.B-Bl A sorry move! Now one can see how dreadfully bad it is to have a backward pawn in an open file. It makes one’s own pieces backward! If 22. Kt—B4, then 22....BxkKt; 23. RxB, Q — K2! (better than P —Q6 at once on account of the reply R-—K4); 24. K -B2, P-—B4 and White is still unable to free himself from the pressure. 225 aie Kt — K4 With this move the direct attack at last begins. Sacrifices at White’s KB3 are threatened. 23. P — B4 Forcing the Knight to the attack. The best move was B - Kt2. 23. .... Kt — Kt5 24. Kt —- B4 Bx Kt 25.RxB Q —- KKt3!! Black is not guarding the ‘“‘weak” (!) Queen’s pawn but play- ing for a mate. He threatens annihilation by Q-R4. White’s King cannot be defended. The obstacle at his K2 cuts him off from his pieces. 26. B —- Kt2 Kt x P! A powerful sacrifice which smashes down the defences. It would also have been the reply to B — R3. 27. K x Kt Q x P, ch 28. K — Ktl P -—Q6 The isolated Queen’s pawn decides the issue. The threat is R x P, which leads to mate or the loss of White’s Queen. 29. R —- B3 380 GAMES Played so that after 29....R xP; 30.RxR,RxR; 31.QxR, PxQ; 32.RxQ, P-—K8 (Q), ch he can fight on with Rook and Bishop against Queen. Here one sees the fate that not infrequently threatens the isolated Queen’s pawn— it becomes a Queen! V1! eee R(K1) —- K3 Threatening to force a mate by R- KKt3. If P—B5, then the Rook goes via K5 to KKt5. White resigned. The continua- tion could be: 30. Rx P, R-—KKt3; 31. R-Q8, ch, K —R2; 32. Q— Q5, QxR, ch; 33. K —-R2, R—R6, ch!; 34. Bor K xR and Black would mate by Q — Kt8 or Kt6, respectively. One of the best correspondence games ever played. Dr. Dyck- hoff found the strongest move almost every time (in fact, with but one exception) and in an admirable manner reduced his opponent’s completely false strategy to an absurdity. White had to the very end an advantage in material, but in this fine game, as so often happens, mind triumphed over matter. va GAME No. 6 Played in the Gothenburg tournament, 1920. White: Breyer; Black: Dr. Tarrasch. 1,P-Q4 P — Q4 2.P—-K3 Kt —-KB3 3. Kt -KB3 P-K3 If Black first develops the Queen’s Bishop—at either KB4 or KKt5—, then White can attempt to exploit the absence of that piece from the Queen’s side by playing P—B4 followed by Q — Kt3. 4, QKt — Q2 B — Q3 5. P- B4 Now White threatens to drive back the Bishop and cramp Black’s game by the further advance of the Bishop’s pawn. This must be prevented by either P - QKt3 or P — B4. Bees P —- QKt3 6. Q - B2 B —- Kt2 Black could have prevented the advance of the Bishop’s pawn GAMES 381 by playing either Q —-K2 or P ~ B4—but then he would have prevented his opponent from making a mistake. 7. P—B5 Mistaken strategy, since White gives up the centre and Black will eventually obtain the mastery there. (ere PxP 8.PxP B —-K2 Black has now a Queen’s pawn for a Queen's Knight’s pawn. 9. P-QKt4 Castles Black’s plan now is to advance his King’s pawn. If he succeeds, then he must surely, one would think, gain an advantage out- weighing White’s unquestionable superiority on the Queen’s side. 10. B —-Kt2 P —~QR4 11. P—Kt5 This second advance is a decisive mistake, for now the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn loses its support and becomes weak. White should have guarded the Queen’s Knight’s pawn by P - QR3; of course, the pawns would then have remained in a defensive position, whereas now they are very threatening. ib eee P-—B3 This prevents P — B6 and fixes the object of attack, the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. 12. P—QR4 Now, of course, Black must never capture the Queen’s Knight’s pawn, for White would recapture with the pawn and obtain two united and irresistible passed pawns. eee QKt — Q2 Beginning the attack on the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. 13. B-—Q4 B — R3 would make things easier for Black, for he could at once play P—K4. Now, however, Black has a very difficult game. To continue the attack on the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn by play- ing R-B1 would be very bad, for White would close the Queen’s Bishop’s file by playing P —- Kt6 and would then win the Queen’s Rook’s pawn by Q-—B3 and Kt—Kt3. Besides 382 GAMES this plan, Black had to consider how to bring about the advance of his King’s pawn—therefore Q -B2 or Q-Ktl. But after 13....Q — B2 there follows 14. P —Kt6, Q —Ktl and now White prevents that advance by 15.Q-B3. If (instead of Q — B2) 13....Q —Ktl, then after 14. R-—QKtl1 the Queen would be very uncomfortable. 13... R -K1! Making way for the Bishop. 14,R-Bl B-KBI1 Again threatening P — K4. 15. Q — Kt2 Kt — Kt5! Systematically continuing his plan of advancing the King’s pawn. Already at this point, without being too hopeful, Black had a feeling that this Knight might eventually find a post at his K3. 16. P—-R3 Kt -R3 17, Kt —- Kt3 With this move and his next White at once makes preparations against the threat. iy or P-B3 18. Q-R3 P-—K4 Black has carried out his plan but this, owing to White’s careful defence, is still far from being decisive. The question is still whether White’s Queen’s side pawns, which are a con- stant danger to Black, are strong or weak. Black now directs further attacks against the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. 19. B- B3 Q - B2 Now this move is good, for P — Kt6 is out of the question on account of Q x P followed by BxQ. P xP would be inferior to the text-move. Admittedly the pawn could not recapture because of P—R5. But with B x KtP White would complete his development—for which up to now the necessity for defensive moves has given him no time—and have quite a good game. In this exceptionally difficult game it is not sufficient for Black to make good moves; in order to demonstrate his strategic advantage he must always, right to the very end, find the strongest move possible. 20. B —- Kt2 GAMES 383 With the cunning plan of removing his Queen from the danger- ous diagonal QR3 to KB8. Now Black has his last oppor- tunity of making his position secure—by 20.... Px P?; 21. Bx KtP, B-B3. But White would then have a quite satisfactory game. 20. .... KR - Bl! One would think that this fourfold attack on the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn must lead to its capture, for P—Kt6 is in- adequate on account of Kt x KtP followed by BxQ. But White guards the pawn indirectly by removing a guard from it. 20. Q — R2! Very finely played! Now Black cannot make the move he planned, P x P, for after P—B6 followed by P x P he loses a piece. Therefore, he must not open the frontal attack on the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn, as he had planned, but, even worse, he must allow the terrible move P—-Kt6. So it seems after all as if White’s play has been justified, since at this moment the Queen’s Bishop’s and Queen’s Knight’s pawns prove to be not weak but very strong. A ee Q-Ql! A new design upon the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. The Queen is to goto KB1. What curious regroupings! At the moment P x P, winning the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn, is again threatened. 22. P —-Kt6 B-K2 Now Black threatens to launch a threefold attack on his objective by playing Q-Bl. If White then guards it by either B-R3 or Q-R3, then Black plays KtxKtP. But this new attack is also guarded against by White. 23. Q ~ Ktl Q- Bl 24. Q — B2 Kt — B2 The dream is coming true! Although the manceuvre takes time, the Knight actually does find a post at K3 where it com- pletes a fourfold attack on the objective and at last brings about the decision, for the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn cannot be guarded a fourth time—or, rather, it can be guarded by B — R3 but then the Queen’s Knight’s pawn falls. 25, P —-R4 A fine manceuvre to make a way for the King’s Bishop with 384 GAMES which White hopes to guard indirectly the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. 25. .... Kt -Q1 26. P —-Kt3 Kt —K3 27. B—-KR3 Up to now White has not been able to develop this Bishop! Now, if Black captures the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn, White wins the Exchange. rf arr Kt(K3) x P! Black will not allow the threatened loss of the Exchange to seduce him from accomplishing his plan. The Queen’s Bishop’s pawn is the key to the position and with its capture the game is strategically decided, whether the Exchange is lost or not. Therefore Black’s play has been justified and he has demonstrated the weakness of White’s advanced Queen’s side pawns. Up to now, except for two pawns, everything was still on the board. 28. Kt x Kt Kt x Kt 29. B-R3 White overlooks the reply. It would have been better to capture the Rook at once and then castle. Even then White’s game would have been lost, for at the very least the Queen’s Knight’s pawn would also have fallen so that Black would have had a splendid position with two united passed pawns for the Exchange. A: eee Kt — Q6, ch 30. Q x Kt BxB 31.BxR RxB Now Black threatens a fork by P — K5. 32. R -Rl B — Kt5, ch 33. Kt — Q2 Now Black has much the superior game. In point of material, a Rook and two Bishops are in the end-game frequently stronger than two Rooks and a Knight; moreover, the Queen’s Knight’s pawn must be lost, Black’s centre is very strong and the advance of the Queen’s and Queen’s Bishop’s pawns must result in two united passed pawns. White has not yet castled and, moreover, this can be prevented by R-—Rl followed by GAMES 385 B-R3. White’s Rooks have no open file and his Knight is pinned, so that, in point of fact, he has only his Queen in play. Black’s concern now is the tactical exploitation of the position. The simplest—though not the best—method was Q-—B4 followed by QxP and the advance of the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn. In the following part of the game Black plays to pre- vent castling, to rob his opponent of every good move, to force his pieces (particularly the Knight) into unfavourable positions and finally to drive him to desperation. 33. .... P —K5 34. Q —-Kt3 In reply to Q — K2 Black could play R — R1 followed by B — R3. 34. .... P—QB4 35. K -Q1 P—B5 36. Q —R2 Q - Q3 37. K —-K2 Hoping to escape to the King’s side—which, however, Black prevents. ne B-R3 38. P — Kt7 R -Ktl! Any other move would be much inferior. 39. K - QI] RxP 40. P-B3 He ts driven to desperation. Already for him it is no question of good or bad moves. 40. .... K-Rl So as to be able to play P — B6 without losing the King’s pawn. 41.PxP PxP Now, to crown it all, Black obtains an overwhelming attack on the King. 42. K -Bl QxP 43. Kt - Bl If Kt x BP, then B x Kt (with R — QB2 to follow) and White loses at least a piece. 43. .... Q —K8, ch 44, K —B2 Q — B6, ch 386 GAMES 45.K -QIl Q - Q6, ch 46. K -Bl R -Q2 and White resigned since the threat of 47.... Q —Q8, ch: 48. K ~Kt2, P-B6, mate, could not well be parried. If 47.Q-QB2, then 47....B-R6,ch; 48.RxB, Q~xR, ch; 49. Q -Kt2, R-—Q8, ch; 50. K —B2?, Q—Q6, mate. One of the best but also one of the most difficult games I have ever played. * Game No. 7 Played in the Vienna tournament, 1898. White: Dr. Tarrasch; Black: Pillsbury. 1.P—K4 P-—K4 2. Kt~KB3 Kt —QB3 3. B-Kt5 Kt — B3 4. Castles Kt xP 5.R-KI1 This is the obvious move but it causes Black no difficulties. The attack by P-—Q4 is stronger. Regarding the opening see p. 279. Dis ise Kt — Q3 It is generally not good to block the Queen’s pawn in this way and so retard one’s own development. The present case, how- ever, is a well justified exception. The Knight attacks the Bishop and, if this captures the other Knight, the Queen’s pawn recaptures and the drawback of the move Kt — Q3, the retardation of development, is removed with advantage to Black. If, however, the Bishop retires or is guarded, then Black gains time to maintain by P — B3 the extra pawn arising from the capture on the 4th move. Ifthe moves 3.... P -QR3; 4. B — R4 had been interpolated, then the Knight would have attacked the Bishop by going to QB4. The combination of a retreating move with an attack is naturally much more effective than a purely passive retreat. 6. Kt xP Threatening destruction by a discovered attack—an elementary combination of very frequent occurrence. Gscieus B K2 GAMES 387 This move (a counterpart to Black’s Kt —-Q3) was played in this position by Steinitz against Zukertort in their World’s Championship match of 1886. It is, however, not good, as, without either necessity or advantage, it blocks the absolutely essential advance of the Queen’s pawn. The retreat to KB, also adopted by Steinitz, is better. Before very long White will regret that he cannot move the Queen’s pawn. One should always try to make normal moves. y errs Kt x Kt 8.RxKt Castles 9. Kt —-B3 P —- QB3 The right idea which refutes the move B-Q3. Black plays for a normal development by Kt —-K1 and P-Q4. The continua- tion of the development would be B — Q3 and Kt — B3—and all Black’s pieces would be in their correct positions. Zukertort played B — B3 followed by R — K1] with an approximately even game. Another plan of development would be P-QKt3 followed by B — Kt2, but this would be no refutation. On the contrary, the Knight would still be as badly posted as White’s Bishop. The only right plan is the one here adopted by Pillsbury. 10. Q -R5 White is attempting to provoke a loosening of the hostile King’s position. He has also to consider acknowledging his error and correcting it by B- Bl and P-Q4. 10. 2555 P—KKt3 This is the mistake that prevents Black from obtaining an advantage. He should, instead, have played P-KR3. The mistake is so minute that only just now have I discovered it during a closer study of this game. That it is a mistake is shown by the following considerations: When he played P —QB3, Black was preparing to continue with Kt —-K1 and P—Q4. To these moves B—Q3 and Kt — B3 are the appro- priate sequel. If, however, he has played P-KKt3, it is absolutely imperative for him to post the Bishop at KKt2 (via KB3). This holds for all castled positions with an advanced Knight’s pawn. Once the position is loosened by P —-KKt3, it must be repaired by B —- KKt2 or else there will be dangerous “holes” at KB3 and KR3. But here Black cannot well play 388 GAMES his Bishop to KKt2 as then the pin by B — QR3 will be trouble- some. Consequently Black now has at his KB3 a permanent weakness which in the further course of the game, as we shall see from time to time, repeatedly makes itself felt and eventu- ally proves decisive. 11.Q-B3 Kt - K1 12. P-QKt3 P—-Q4 To this strong centre pawn White has no equivalent; the pawn at his Q2 is far from being one. Its right place is Q4. 13. B - Kt2 B-K3 If, instead of this, Black continued his deployment with B — B3 and B — Kt2, then, as mentioned above, B —- R3 would be very troublesome. (13....B —-—B3; 14.R —K2, B—Kt2?; 15. B —R3, Kt — Q3; 16. Q —Kt3 and White wins the Exchange.) 14, QR - KI The command of the only open file is here of little importance since the file is obstructed by the Bishop at Black’s K3. White has an advantage in time; Black, however, in space. Cee Kt — Kt2 It is the Bishop that should be here. The Knight never gets properly into play during the rest of the game. 15. R(K5) — K2 White withdraws the Rook from its exposed position in order to bring the Knight va Q1, K3 and KKt4 to an attack on the weak point. 1D st B-B3 16. B-R3 R-K]l 17. Kt - Ql B—-Q5 Black wishes to develop his Queen, which, however, has to guard the Bishop as long as the latter remains at KB3. The pressure on that square is already perceptible. . 18. P-B3 To drive the Bishop away to the Queen’s side and so weaken Black’s KB3 still further. 18. .... B-Kt3 19. Kt-K3 Q - Q2 GAMES 389 Preventing Kt — Kt4. 20. P-R3 In order to be able to play Kt — Kt4. 20. .... P —-QB4 Now White’s Queen’s Bishop is terribly placed. 21.B-Bl Intending to advance the Queen’s pawn and open for the Bishop a path to KR6. 4 eee B - B2 Threatening Q —Q3. 22. Kt — Kt4 BxKt Black exchanges a Bishop for the threatening Knight without regret since one of the two hostile Bishops is at present inactive. But he who has the Bishops has the future. 23.PxB At last White crosses the third rank. At KKt4 the pawn is very strong. 7 Ee R-K3 Black could have simplified the game by exchanging Rooks followed by R —K1, but doubtless he feared that in the end- game the two Bishops would be dangerous. 24, P — BA! This move, in conjunction with White’s next one, leads to the freeing of the Queen’s Bishop. 24, .... P—-Q5 25. B — K4! Naturally, not QxP? because of B-—R7,ch, winning the Queen. 25. .... R —Ktl Now White has the much superior game. His Bishops have open lines, and Black’s Knight is badly posted—all as a result of Black’s P~KKt3! The weakness created at Black’s KB3 390 GAMES compelled him to make the unfavourable exchange of Bishop for Knight. 26. .... P-Kt3 27. P -Kt3 A precaution against Q — Q3 Pot ree P-—-KR4 Black wants to play his Knight to a better post—and, if possible, to KB3. If he does not move the King’s Rook’s pawn, then White can make the King’s Bishop’s and King’s Rook’s pawns backward by P—Kt5 and then advance his pawns in the following attacking formation: P-—B4 (after Q — Kt2), P-KKt4 and eventually P—B5. We see that the doubling of his Knight’s pawn is advantageous to White. The pawn is much more effective at Kt4 than at R3, since it is nearer the centre and further advanced. 28. Px P Kt xP Now White prevents the playing of the Knight to KB3 where it would be very well placed. All the time the weakness of that point is noticeable. 29. B —-Q5 RxR 30.RxR Now White has also the command of the open file, for 30.... R —K1 would be a twofold mistake: in the first place, because of 31. B—B6, and, in the second, because of 31. Q xP, ch, QxQ; 32.R xR, ch. 30. .... K — Kt2 Again in the hope of playing Kt — B3. 31. B - Kt5! Preventing Kt—B3 and threatening a decisive attack by 32.R —K7. This threat cannot be parried by 31.... B-QlI, for then there would follow: 32. R -K7!, BxR; 33. Q xP, ch, K-Rl1; 34.QxP, BxB; 35. QxKt, ch, Q—R2; 36.Q xB. As a result White would have the advantage of two united passed pawns against the Exchange and, in addition, the posi- tion of Black’s King would be so exposed that a mating attack would be possible: 36.... R-K1 (Q-—K5, ch is threatened); 37. B—K4, Q-K2 (if R xB, then White, after checking on GAMES 391 the 8th and 7th ranks, exchanges Queens and then, after P xR, wins with his three united passed pawns); 38. Q — R6, ch, K -Ktl; 39. B — Q5, ch, and White wins. 31..... P-B3 32. R — K6!! The weak point is attacked right up to the very end. If Black captures the Bishop, then there follows 33. Q—K4, with the double threat of R —-K7, ch, and QxP, ch. If 33.... Kt —B3, then 34. R—K7, ch, K-Bl; 35.RxQ, KtxQ; 36.RxB and White has a winning end-game. 2 nee B-K4 Now the Knight, badly posted on a side of the board, is sud- denly threatened with death (by P ~KKt4)—and absolutely nothing can be done. If 33...K-Rl; 34. P-—KKt4, Kt- Kt2, then 35. Q—R3, ch wins; if 33.... Q -QB2 (in order to save the Knight by playing it to KB5 after P -KKt4), then 34. R —B6 destroys this guard on that square; while 33.... K—-B1 and 33.... P-B4 are out of the question on account of 34.R xB. All this is indirectly caused by the weakness of Black’s KB3. Now the game is decided—but the finish is still very interesting. 33. .... R-KRI1 34, P-KKt4 Q - QB2 35. P x Kt RxP 36. R —-K8 Renewing the attack. 36. .... Q - Q2 37. R — Kt8, ch K ~—R2 38. Q —Kt2 Q ~- B4 39. B -K4 R-R7 40. R x P! This, in conjunction with White’s next move, provides a very original finish. 40. .... R x Q, ch and Black resigned. He loses his Queen and so is a Rook down. 392 GAMES GamE No. 8 Played in the Carlsbad tournament, 1923. White: Dr. Alekhine; Black: Yates. 1.P-Q4 Kt —KB3 2. P-QB4 P-KKt3 The Indian Defence, with the King’s Fianchetto system— which is now seldom played. It leaves the opponent too much freedom in the centre. But I warn you against misusing this freedom by playing a third pawn to the centre by P —-K4 ora fourth by P-—B4. In the Opening this is too much of a good thing and loosens White’s position far too much. Regarding the opening see p. 352. 3. P-KKt3 This is the right way to develop the King’s Bishop which at KKt2 commands a completely open diagonal. At K2 it would be but moderately posted, at Q3 quite badly since, as is always the case when the opponent has played the King’s Fianchetto, it would be attacking the triangle of pawns at KB2, KKt3 and KR2. ee B-—Kt2 4.B-—Kt2 Castles 5. Kt —- QB3 P —Q3 6. Kt —- B3 Kt — B3 7. P—Q5? By this move White, without gaining any particular advantage, abandons his K5 to Black’s pieces which till the end of the game settle there in turn and threaten him. In addition, White prematurely uses up the strength of his centre pawns and opens a diagonal for Black’s King’s Bishop. He should leave the pawn at Q4 and obtain a good development by Castles, B—K3 (after P-KR3—to prevent Kt -KKt5) and Q - Q2. eer Kt — Ktl The Knight could, instead, go to K4; the exchange there would be favourable to Black, who would thus get a strong pawn in the centre. But the retreat with the loss of a tempo is per- missible as Black has still made as many developing moves a8 White. 8. P-K4 GAMES 393 This move also has little point—it lessens the chances of the King’s Bishop and weakens White’s KB3. Continuation of his development by castling would have been better. 8... QKt -— Q2 9. Castles P —-QR4 A well-known manceuvre to prevent the dislodging (by P — QKt4) of the Queen’s Knight which is to play to QB4. 10. B-—K3 Not good, since not far enough reckoned. White thinks he can ward off the attack on the Bishop (by Kt — Kt5) by play- ing, in reply, B -Q4—but this is a mistake. He should first secure the development of the Bishop at K3 by playing P —- KR3, and reply to Kt — B4 with Kt — Q4. IO. sas Kt — Ktd 11. B-Q4 KKt — K4! Now already the disadvantage of the move P — Q5 is obvious. The Knight is splendidly posted here in the centre, it attacks the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn and, above all, it prevents the exchange of Black’s King’s Bishop, which piece is indispensable for the protection of the King’s position after the Fianchetto. White’s main object, after guarding the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn, should be to drive the Knight away again by P-B4. Thus either P—Kt3 followed by Kt-—K1 and P-B4 or at once Kt —Q2 followed by P—B4—but, in any case, P-B4! As Alekhine plays, he does not succeed in making this important move throughout the whole game. 12. Kt x Kt This exchange of White’s Knight at KB3 for Black’s at his Q2 (not the one at his K4) merely eases Black’s game. 1 ee Kt x Kt White had certainly thought he could now safely continue with P — B4, after which move Black could not capture the Queen’s Bishop’s pawn since White, by exchanging Bishops and then playing Q-—Q4, ch, would win the Knight. But after 13. P-—B4 Black can play the annoying move 13.... B—Kt5 and then, after 14. Q —Kt3, can bring about an exchange by 14.... Kt -B6, ch; 15. Bx Kt, Bx B, ch. Nevertheless, White 394 GAMES could have allowed this variation, for after 16. K —Kt2 the game would have been about even. 13. P - Bd After this move White soon finds himself somewhat at a dis- advantage, for now Black wins one tempo after another and brings his Queen’s Bishop into a threatening position. The correct play was to guard the pawn by P — Kt3 and then attack the Knight by P — B4, for after P — Kt3 the Queen would have, in reply to B — Kt5, a convenient post at Q2. i eee P xP! 14.BxP P — Kt3! 15. B -Q4 B - QR3! Now Black’s minor pieces are splendidly posted and thus he has already the slightly better position. 16. R-K1 Now one would think that at last P —- B4 could be played and then everything would be all right. 165 35 Q - Q3 Excellently played! A cunning trap, quite in Yates’ style. If now 17. P-—B4, then 17.... Kt —Q6 and after the obvious reply 18.BxB White is lost, for Black mates in a few moves: 18.... Q —B4, ch; 19. K —- Rl (if K —-B1?, then Q — B7, mate), Kt-—B7,ch; 20. K-—Ktl and now Black does not capture the Queen but brings about a smothered mate: 20.... Kt —R6, ch; 21.K-R1, Q-Kt8,ch; 22.RxQ, Kt-—B7, mate. White can delay the mate by interposing his Bishop at Q4 and his Rook at K3 and by the latter move can pre- vent the smothered mate. Then Black is forced to take the Queen and afterwards mate by Q-K8, ch, etc. Also, after 18, P —K5! (instead of Bx B) Black gets the advantage—by 18... Q-—Kt5; 19. R-K4, Kt x KtP. 17.B-Bl Played to guard his Q3 where the Knight threatens to enter his position. But after the exchange of the Bishop, White's King’s position is weakened. VT ccic BxB 18.RxB P —-QB4 GAMES 395 This either drives White’s Bishop out of the centre or forces its exchange (B x Kt), which is favourable to Black. 19. Bx Kt PxP,e.p. would be a mistake, for Black would sacrifice his Queen by Q x B and then win White’s by Kt — B6, ch. jt Bere QxB To take with the Bishop would not be so good, for after 20. P-B4, B-Q5,ch White would threaten not only an exchange by Kt — Kt5 but also the advance of the King’s pawn. 20. Q — Kt3 Instead of this, White could bring about an approximately even end-game by 20. P — B4, Q —- Q5, ch; 21.Q x Q, B x Q, ch; 21. K—Kt2. However, the Queen’s move is better. 20. .... QR - Ktl 21. Q —Kté A peculiar move! Here White had his last opportunity of regaining control of his K5—by either QR -—QI followed by P — B4 or, perhaps, by P —- B4 at once—and thus putting the situation right again. 21s sees P — B4! The beginning of the attack on White’s weakened King’s side. The immediate threat is to close White in by the further advance of the pawn. 22. QR —- K1 The opening of the King’s Bishop’s file for Black by P x P was certainly the lesser evil. Das sie P-—KB5 Now we get the typical King’s side attack that generally follows the advance of the hostile King’s Bishop’s pawn beyond the fourth rank—see p. 151. 23. Q-Q7 In order to play the Queen to KR3 to aid in the defence of the King’s side. 23. 4. QR - Ql 396 GAMES This voluntary breaking-up of his King’s position is highly unfavourable to White, veritable suicide. It fixes his King’s Bishop’s pawn in a backward position and leads to a mating attack on his KR2. Q-R3 was much better; the shutting in by P~B6 was not unendurable. The exchange of Queens by 24. Q —-K6, ch, QxQ; 25. PxQ would certainly put an end to the King’s side attack but then the pawn at K6 would be lost at once. 24. .... Qx BP 25. Q — K6, ch In reply to Q x P, Black would not make the obvious attacking move B — K4 because White could guard the mate by Q — K6, ch followed by Q-—R3. Black would, instead, before making the decisive move B — K4, drive the Queen to QKt7 by KR —K1 (not QR — K1 because of Q — Q7). 25. 1. K -RIl 26. P-B3 In order to guard his KR2 by R—K2. Now Black’s King’s pawn needs protection. 26. .... Q — Kt4, ch 27.K—-Rl If 27. Q—Kt4, then Black could follow up his advantage by 27.... B— Q5, ch; 28. K—-R1, Q-Q7; 29. R —-K2, Q —-Q6 and by the attack on Knight and Rook at least win a pawn at White’s QB3. But now it is even worse. a eee R - Q3 The development of the attack is clear—Black plays his Bishop to K4 and doubles his Rooks; then one attacking move follows another almost automatically. 28.Q-R3 B-K4 29.R -K2 R(Q3) - KB3 30. Kt-Ql The Knight is to come to the aid of the King’s side and defend and attack at KKt4.' If 30. R—Kt2, then the Queen would enter at K6 and after 31. R—K2, Q — Q6 something would be lost. 30. .... R-B5 31. Kt —-K3 R—-R5 32. Q —-K6 Q - R4! GAMES 397 Attacking White’s KR2 and KB3, and at one of those points the bomb must explode. 33. Kt —- Kt4 White seeks to rob his opponent of victory by placing before him the alternatives of sacrifice or retreat. Without hesitation the fearless Yates decides on the former. 33. .... R x Kt! The only continuation of the attack—but it forces the win. Yates has not made a calculation twenty moves deep but has felt instinctively that the combination must lead to victory. White’s moves are now forced. 34. PxR R xR, ch 35. K —Kt2 Black has won a piece but must now lose a Rook, so that he will be the Exchange down. But his Queen supported by the Bishop now gets an attack against the King, completely exposed and abandoned by his Queen. Now arise some very pretty problems, all of which Yates solves without faltering. 35. .... Q x RP, ch 36. K xR Q — R8, ch 37. K — B2 B — Q5, ch 38. K —Kt3 Q — Kt8, ch 39. K —-R3 If K-B3, then Q-B8,ch wins the Rook. 39. R-Kt2, Q -K8, ch leads to the same position as does the text-move, but sooner. 39. .... Q — B8, ch 40. R —-Kt2 Q - R8, ch Always the right check!—and never a repetition of moves! 41. K -Kt3 If 41. R-R2, then 41....Q-—B6, ch; 42. K —R4, B -B3, ch; 43. P—-Kt5, P—R3!; 44. Px B?, P—Kt4, mate. If 44. Q- B8, ch, then the King naturally does not go to Kt2—since then the Bishop would be captured with check — but to R2. The best move would be 44.R—Kt2. Then it would naturally be a mistake to capture the Rook at once since White 398 GAMES would then take the Bishop—and the issue of the struggle would be doubtful. The correct play (instead of 44....Q x R) would be 44....PxP,ch; 45. Rx P, Q-—R4, ch (the pinned Rook cannot take and is now taken with check); 46. K — Kt3, Q xR, ch and Black wins since he is a Bishop to the good. 4l..... Q —K8, ch 42. K-—R3 If K —R2?, then Q —R5, mate. 42. .... P —-KKté! Threatening Q-—R5, mate. If 43. Q-R6, then 43.... Q- R8, ch; 44. R—-R2?, Q-B6, mate. These mating continua- tions with the slight material are brilliant. 43. R - QB2 The best move to make room for the King. If R—Kt3, then Q-R8, mate. If, instead, R-R2, then Q-—K6 or RS, ch, followed by Q -—B7, ch and Q —Kt8 or B6, mate. 43. .... Q — B8, ch 44, K —R2 If K — Kt3, then Q — Q6, ch wins the Rook. If 44. R —Kt2, then 44....Q-R8, ch; 45. K —Kt3!, Q-—KS8, ch either leads to mate by Q — K6 or Q — R65 or else wins the Rook. 44. .... Q - Kt8, ch 45. K —-R3 Q - R8, ch 46. K — Kt3! Q — Q8!! Again, a quiet move of tremendous strength. 47. R-B3 If R —Kt2, then Q -K8, ch followed by mate or the gain of the Rook. If 47. R-—R2, then there follows mate in five moves: 47....Q —Q6, ch; 48. K —-Kt2, Q —K7, ch; 49. K — Kt3, Q-K6, ch; 50. K-Kt2, Q-B7, ch; 51. K-—RI1, Q-—Kt8, mate, or 51. K —- R3, Q- B6, mate. Also 47. Q — B7 (threaten- ing Q — B8, mate) does not help. Black has only to be careful to capture the Rook with check, thus: 47.... Q—Q6, ch; 48. Q-B3, B-K4, ch. Now the King must go on the second rank—or else the Queen is lost—and the Rook is captured with GAMES 399 check. In the excited anticipation of victory never overlook a threatened mate. 47..... Q — Kt8, ch 48. K -R3 K — B3 is followed by the same mating continuation. 48. .... Q — B8, ch 49. K —-Kt3 If 49. K —R2,then 49....B —Kt8, ch; 50. K —R]1 (if K — Kt3, then Q-B7,ch, followed by Q-R/7, mate), B-B7, ch; 51. K — R2, Q — Kt8, ch; 52. K —R3, Q - R8, mate. 49..... B ~ B7, ch 50. K - B3 B - Kt8, ch White resigned. Mate follows in two moves: 51. K — Kt3, Q -—B7, ch; 52.K—R3, Q~R7, mate. This splendid game deservedly obtained a prize for brilliancy. GAME No. 9 Played in the Hastings tournament, Christmas 1932. White: L. Steiner; Black: Flohr. 1.P-—K4 P ~QB3 This move, very favoured nowadays, cannot possibly be sufficient to give equality. It develops nothing and robs the Queen’s Knight of its best square for development. 2. P-QB4 A very good reply, adopted by me thirty years ago. It dis- turbs Black’s preconceived ideas—he naturally expects P-—Q4—and at the very beginning of the gane compels him to think for himself—and this is not to everyone’s taste. Re- garding the opening see p. 334. ree P-—Q4 3. BPxP PxP 4,.PxP If now the Queen takes, then after 5. Kt -QB3, Q —-QR4; 6. P-Q4 White has a good game, analogous to that which he 400 GAMES obtains in the Centre Counter Game (1.P-—K4, P-—Q4; 2.PxP, QxP; 3. Kt-QB3, Q-QR4; 4. P-Q4). If, how- ever, 4....Kt—KB3, then there follows 5. B-—Kt5, ch, B-Q2; 6. B-B4 and Black finds it difficult to win back the pawn. He has, perhaps, a better chance of doing so by 6.... QKt — Q2 (instead of B — Q2) followed by P~QR3. Therefore 5. Q-—R4, ch, followed, if 5....B-Q2, by 6.Q-—Kt3, has strong claims to consideration. 4... P—QR3 To prevent the check with the Bishop. A new move which, however, does not justify itself. White maintains his extra pawn with a good game. 5. Q-Kt3 This must certainly be condemned, even if it merely leads to a transposition of moves. The natural and correct move to guard the pawn was Kt —-QB3, for it is certain where this Knight must be developed but it is not so for the Queen—she could, perhaps, be played to KB3 later on. And for the Queen to be the first piece developed—and, what is more, neither by necessity nor for advantage—is against all Theory. Dida Kt ~KB3 6. Kt —-QB3 QKt — Q2 Naturally Black at once attempts to win back the pawn he has sacrificed. He does not succeed, however, and the pawn exerts a pressure on his game. 7. B—K2 P-KKt3 He immediately abandons his intention—and rightly so, for after 7.... Kt -Kt3 White guards the pawn by 8. B —B3 and then advances the Queen’s Rook’s pawn against the Knight. 7.... Kt-B4; 8.Q-B4 would also give Black absolutely nothing. So he is forced to content himself with simple— and somewhat laborious—development. 8. P-Q4 B-Kt2 9. B- B3 Castles 10. KKt — K2 Black has absolutely nothing for the pawn he has sacrificed; GAMES 401 at the same time, however, White’s King’s Bishop and King’s Knight are posted purely defensively. 10.252 Kt —- Kl! Black cannot even continue his development undisturbed. If P—Kt3?, then P—Q6. He must first block the advance of the pawn. 11. P -QR4 Here White has several good continuations at his disposal: B — B4, in order to capture the Knight when it plays to Q3, or Kt-—K4 with the same intention. Also the advance of the Queen’s Rook’s pawn to QR5 is good. | eee Kt — Q3 12. Castles He stops half-way! To play the pawn to R4 was of little value. It should have gone to R5 where it would blockade Black. Sooner or later Black would have had to move his Queen’s Knight’s pawn and then after Px P or Px P, e.p. his Queen’s side would have been weakened. BD 2x P-Kt3 Now Black has arrived at some sort of development. 13. Kt —K4 Kt x Kt 14.Bx Kt B -Kt2 Now Black threatens to win back the pawn by Kt -B3. White should now anticipate this attack by playing B- B3 and then (after Kt -B3) play Kt-B3. Then he would still have the better game. 15. B —-Kt5 With this move and the exchange which follows he throws away his chances of a win. However, it was very difficult to see that the exchange was a mistake until after it had taken place. | Faerree Kt — B3 16. B x Kt PxB! Showing deep position-judgment! He makes his opponent’s extra pawn a passed one but in compensation his own King’s pawn, that at K2 was purely passive, is now active, an attack- 2D 402 GAMES ing pawn; it exerts an influence on the centre and eventually advances to the attack. Also Black gets the King’s file for his Rooks. Now White has no longer the advantage, in fact Black’s game is to be preferred on account of his two Bishops, each of which attacks a weak pawn. 17. QR -Bl Q — Q3 18. R — B2 This move White could save for he never succeeds in doubling Rooks in the Bishop’s file and the Rook is better posted on the first rank since this avoids the surprise of R —-K8, ch, which is threatened later. Instead of making the move with the Rook, White by playing KR - QI and Kt — B3 could at once ‘ proceed to carry out the plan sketched in the note to his 20th move. 18. .... QR - Ql) With this move nothing can be achieved for, if Black takes the Queen’s pawn, White wins the Queen’s Knight’s pawn. The Rook should be played to K1. 19. B-B3 P—- B4 20. R - Ql White has a definite plan which in the following play he carries out systematically. The Knight, which is unsatisfactorily posted at K2, is to go via QB3, QR2 and QKt4 to QB6. But for this plan to be carried out the pawn at Q4 must be guarded. 20. .... KR -K1 21. P—Kt3 White has to make a flight-square for the King. If he plays Kt — B3, Black can play KB xP since the Rook cannot re- capture. However, the pawn at KKt3 later on provides a target for Black’s attack. Bisnis R -K2 22. Kt - B3 QR - K1 We see that Black has lost a tempo with this Rook. 23. R —-K2 Black threatened to win the pawn at White’s Q4 by R — K8, ch. eo ae B-KB3 24.R xR RxR 25. Kt —- R2 GAMES 403 # If the Queen’s Rook’s pawn were not so unfortunately posted at QR4, White could now bring the Knight into a very good position by 25. Kt-R4, P-QKt4; 26. Kt-—B5. Now he threatens to play it via QKt4 to QB6. 25. 0s. P-QR4 26. Q -Kt6 White now prepares to continue his action on the Queen’s side by P-QKt4 but he over-estimates his position, for in the meantime Black starts a decisive King’s side attack. White should have simplified the game by 26. Kt —- B3 (threatening Kt — Kt5 followed by P-Q6), B-—R3; 27. Kt —-Kt5, B x Kt; 28. Q xB for after 28....R—B2; 29.Q-—Kt3 he would have had good drawing chances. More he could not have expected, in spite of his extra pawn. 26. .... P-—R4! 27. P - QKt4 P — R4 does not help at all; the attack is continued with P — B5. 2s sia P-—R5 28. B —-Kt2 If 28. QKtP x P, then there would follow the double attack 28....Q —R6, with very complicated variations, advantageous to Black. If 29. B-Kt2, QxKt; 30. P—Q6!, Black would save his two threatened pieces by playing 30....R —K5 and would have two Bishops for the Rook, but the advanced passed pawns at Q6 and eventually QR6 or QKt6 would still give White some chances. White should, therefore, have embarked on this hazardous line of play. As he does play, the attack which Black now executes with great verve carries all before it. 28. .... KRP xP 29.RPxP P-B5d 30. P —-Kt4 P — B6! An elegant offer of a pawn—and simply to bring the Queen to the attack via KB5. And this battering-ram—it is the King’s pawn which made a capture at Black’s KB3—White created for Black—one might say, made him a present of it. 31.BxP Q - B5 Attacking the Bishop and the pawn at White’s Q4. 32. Q -Q3 404 GAMES Apparently guarding both. But 32. K —Kt2 was much better for then the pawn at his Q4 would have been indirectly guarded. If 32....KBxP?!, then 33.Q-B4, B—-K4; 34.QxQ, BxQ; 35. P — Q6!. Now at last the passed pawn makes itself felt and decisively so. If the Rook goes to Q2, then White exchanges Bishops and, if Black recaptures, advances the pawn—and this costs Black a piece. If, however, in reply to 35. P —-Q6 Black first plays 35....BxB,ch, then after 36.K xB the other Bishop is attacked and again Black loses a piece. All very simple and forceful. In reply to 33. Q —- B4 Black can try the guarding move 33.... R —-K5, with the intention of replying to B xR with QxKtP, ch. But after the move R—K5 White wins at least the Exchange by 34. Kt — B3 and has a decisive advantage. Thus once again we see how an almost won game may be lost by an apparently quite plausible move. After 32. K -Kt2 Black could continue the attack by 32.... B-—B1 but White could put up some sort of defence by 33. Q-B6, Bx P; 34. P-Q6. 32. .... KB x P! Now the attack is overwhelming. The threat is Q — Kt6, ch with complete destruction. Position after Black’s 32nd move \ mi a ‘wi a 7 18 mk aT 7 A a ia a, wae =a — a Wi 33.QxB If 33. K-—Kt2, then 33.... Bx QP! (threatening to win by QP, ch); 34. BxB, Q x BP, ch; 35. K-—RI! (K —R3 is out of the question because of R —K6, ch, winning: the Queen). Now 35....R —K7 or K6 would be a mistake because of the unpleasant surprise 36. Q x P, ch, followed, after 36.... K — Bl, GAMES 405 by 37.QxP, ch, with exchange of Queens. Therefore 35.... Q -R65,ch!; 36. K -Kt2, QxP, ch. (Now the Queen cannot interpose because after R — K7, ch sheislost. If 37. K -B1?, then 37.... Q-—Kt8, mate. After 37. K —R2 the Rook comes up with check: 37....R —K7, ch). 37.K-RI1!. Now that Black without loss of tempo has prevented the surprise attack at his KKt3 he has several ways of winning, e.g. by 37.... R —K6, followed after 38. QxB by 38....R—R6, mate. The most precise way is by 37....Q-R4,ch; 38. K-Kt2, Q xB, ch; 39.K—-R2 (if 39.Q-B3, then after 39.... R—K7, ch; 40. K -Kt3, B-K4,ch the Queen is lost), Q-—Ré4, ch; 40. K —Kt2 or Kt3, R — K7 or K6, ch, respectively, and wins. If, instead of 39. K-R2, White plays 39. K —Kt3, then 39.... Q —Kt4, ch (not R-K6, ch for White simply takes the Rook); 40. K -R2, Q-R4, ch and Black wins at least the atin 83... QxB Threatening to win the King’s Knight’s pawn by R — K5. 34. Kt —- B3 PxP 35. Q x P(Kt4) Now, apparently, everything is again guarded. White has actually maintained his extra pawn and is attacking the Rook. 1 Bx P! This pretty move wins at once! At the very moment that White loses his extra pawn he loses the game. The threat is Q — Kt7, mate or Q -—R8, mate. 36. Kt xB If RxB, then R-K8, ch, followed by R-—R8, mate. 36. .... Q x R, ch 37. K — R2 R - K3 With the winning of the Exchange the game is decided. There would still be some hope of a draw for White if he could now capture the Queen’s Knight’s pawn (38. Kt x P) but then there would follow an immediately overwhelming attack by 38.... Q-B6; 39. K -Ktl, R —- K7 since the Queen could not guard White’s K B2 without allowing R —- K8, ch followed by R — R8, mate. 38. Kt —-K3 Q - Q3, ch 404 GAMES Apparently guarding both. But 32. K —-Kt2 was much better for then the pawn at his Q4 would have been indirectly guarded. If 32... KB x P?, then 33. Q-B4, B-K4; 34.QxQ, BxQ; 35. P — Q6!. Now at last the passed pawn makes itself felt and decisively so. If the Rook goes to Q2, then White exchanges Bishops and, if Black recaptures, advances the pawn—and this costs Black a piece. If, however, in reply to 35. P — Q6 Black first plays 35....BxB,ch, then after 36.K xB the other Bishop is attacked and again Black loses a piece. All very simple and forceful. In reply to 33. Q —- B4 Black can try the guarding move 33.... R —-K5, with the intention of replying to BxR with QxKtP, ch. But after the move R—K5 White wins at least the Exchange by 34. Kt — B3 and has a decisive advantage. Thus once again we see how an almost won game may be lost by an apparently quite plausible move. After 32. K —-Kt2 Black could continue the attack by 32.... B-B1 but White could put up some sort of defence by 33. Q- B6, Bx P; 34. P-Q6. 32. .... KB x P! Now the attack is overwhelming. The threat is Q —Kt6, ch with complete destruction. Position after Black’s 32nd move wre a BO ie (A sar a ate" ha “a La Ba ts eS a U7, Ai To kW la CT 33. QxB If 33. K—Kt2, then 33.... Bx QP! (threatening to win by QxP, ch); 34.BxB, QxBP, ch; 35. K-Rl1! (K -R3 is out of the question because of R—- K6, ch, winning: the Queen). Now 35....R —K7 or K6 would be a mistake because of the unpleasant surprise 36. Q x P, ch, followed, after 36.... K — Bl, GAMES 405 by 37.QxP, ch, with exchange of Queens. Therefore 35.... Q-R65,ch!; 36. K -Kt2,QxP,ch. (Now the Queen cannot interpose because after R —K7, ch sheislost. If 37. K -Bl?, then 37.... Q—Kt8, mate. After 37. K —R2 the Rook comes up with check: 37.... R -K7, ch). 37. K-RI1!. Now that Black without loss of tempo has prevented the surprise attack at his KKt3 he has several ways of winning, e.g. by 37.... R —K6, followed after 38. QxB by 38....R -—R6, mate. The most precise way is by 37....Q-—R4,ch; 38. K-—Kt2, Q xB, ch; 39.K-R2 (if 39.Q-B3, then after 39....R —K7, ch; 40. K ~Kt3, B-K4,ch the Queen is lost), Q-—Ré4, ch; 40. K —Kt2 or Kt3, R —- K7 or K6, ch, respectively, and wins. If, instead of 39. K-—R2, White plays 39. K —-Kt3, then 39.... Q —Kt4, ch (not R -K6, ch for White simply takes the Rook); 40. K -R2, Q-R4, ch and Black wins at least the a $3. .... QxB Threatening to win the King’s Knight’s pawn by R —K5. 34. Kt — B3 PxP 35. Q x P(Kt4) Now, apparently, everything is again guarded. White has actually maintained his extra pawn and is attacking the Rook. 35. .... Bx P! This pretty move wins at once! At the very moment that White loses his extra pawn he loses the game. The threat is Q —-Kt7, mate or Q —R8, mate. 36. Kt xB If RxB, then R-K8, ch, followed by R-—R8, mate. 36. 2... Q xR, ch 37. K —R2 R —- K3 With the winning of the Exchange the game is decided. There would still be some hope of a draw for White if he could now capture the Queen’s Knight’s pawn (38. Kt x P) but then there would follow an immediately overwhelming attack by 38.... Q -B6; 39. K -Ktl, R — K7 since the Queen could not guard White’s K B2 without allowing R —- K8, ch followed by R —- R8, mate. 38. Kt —-K3 Q - Q3, ch 406 GAMES Black rightly exchanges Queens. An attempt to continue the attack by 38....Q-B6 does not promise very much after 39. K —Ktl, whereas the ending is an absolutely certain win for him. 39.QxQ RxQ Black’s plan must now be to capture the Rook’s pawn and maintain his Queen’s Knight’s pawn, without which it would be very difficult, perhaps impossible, to win the game. If it were Black’s turn to move, then R — Q5 would be immediately decisive. 40. Kt — B4 R — QB3 41. Kt -K5 R -B6 Neither by 41....R—K3; 42. Kt-—B4 nor by 41....R-B4, 42. Kt -Q7 would Black make any progress. 42. Kt - Q7 R —-QKt6 43. P — Ktd! Shutting in Black’s King—without whose co-operation with the Rook Black cannot win. 43. .... P~ B4! Breaking the blockade. If P x P, e.p., then the King comes up and drives the Knight away from the attack on the Queen’s Knight’s pawn so that the Rook can capture the Rook’s pawn. 44, Kt — B6, ch K - B2 45. Kt —-Q5 White has played very cleverly. If he has to give up the attack on the Queen’s Knight’s pawn, at least he wins the King’s Knight’s. 45. 0 K —-K3 46. Kt — B4, ch K — Q3 47. KtxP R — Ktd Now, however, the Rook’s pawn is lost and the passed Knight’s pawn must be decisive. R —R6 would have been much inferior since it would have allowed the Knight more freedom. 48, K —Kt3 P — B4 first would have been preferable. 48. .... R - Kt, ch GAMES 407 In the hope of still being able to win the Rook’s pawn later on, the Rook moves across to the other side in order to capture the passed pawn. 49. K -B3 R x KtP 50. Kt - B4 R — Kt8 In order to return to the Rook’s pawn. 51. Kt - Q3 R —-QR8 52. Kt — Kt2 K —Q4 Naturally 52....R—R7; 53. Kt -B4, ch, K -B4 would also win. The King’s move is, however, more subtle. 53. K — B4 K — K3 is better. 53. .... K — Q3! A new point—the Knight is cut off from its King and after R —QKt8 or K — B6 is lost. White resigned. Tn all such endings it is well not to think a move at a time but to have a guiding plan—that is to say, to conduct the ending strategically. GAME No. 10 Played in a small tournament at Amsterdam, 1933. White: Kleefstra; Black: Dr. Euwe. 1. Kt -KB3 P-Q4 2. P - B4 P —Q5! At last another master who dares to make the best move here! Only a few—Janowski, Alekhine and Rubinstein—have done so, the first two with non-success. Later generations will con- sider it a reproach to the chess world that for more than a decade great masters, almost without exception, made in this. position such faulty moves as P-QB3 and P-K3 and this play was approved by all the other masters and by all theo- reticians with the exception of myself. On p. 355 I have given in its entirety the following system which completely refutes the move 2, P —B4. 3. P - QKt4 408 GAMES This is considered to be the counter-move which is most diffi- cult to meet. It is directed against P -QB4. Be aides P —- KB3! This is the move which is the key-stone of the whole system— and it was not played by any of the three masters previously mentioned. It may be played at once or, as I have given on p. 355, after 3....P—QB4. The move is, naturally, a pre- liminary to the advance of the King’s pawn to K4 where it is indispensable for the protection of the advanced Queen’s pawn. To the maintenance of the pawn at Q5 Black must, in the opening stages at least, devote his entire attention, for the pawn cramps and exerts pressure on White’s game, just as in the opening 1.P-Q4, P-QB4?; 2. P-Q5! White’s pawn at Q5 cramps and exerts pressure on Black’s. { must now give an explanation why, of all people, I, who with almost a fanatical hatred detest as unaesthetic cramping moves like P—QB3 or P—KB3 in the Opening, am emphatically recommending this move. The explanation lies in the fore- going bad move 2. P-—B4. If in the Opening one player has made a bad move, then to exploit this his opponent may— indeed, occasionally must—make moves that are in contra- diction of the principles of an intelligent Opening strategy. An example—admittedly a very exaggerated one. A _ well- known principle is that the Queen should not be brought into play tooearly. (Thus the opening 1. P- K4,P-Q4; 2. PxP, Q x P is to be condemned a priori.) If, however, White plays very badly and moves 1. P —- KB3 in order, after 1.... P - K4, to continue with 2. P-KKt4, then in order to exploit the mistake Black is compelled to depart from the above principle and as his second move to develop his Queen—to KR5 where she gives mate. So in the present game after White’s bad move 2. P-B4 Black is justified in making—and, indeed, after 2....P—Q5, is forced to make—the move P - KB3, on general principles so detestable. 4. B-Kt2 P-K4 5. P-QR3 P - QB4 Black has made no fewer than five pawn moves, one after the other, and has not developed a single piece; which, again, violates all principles. But here this violation is imperative in order that the Queen’s pawn may be maintained at its post . GAMES 409 and White’s opening refuted. Now the threat is to drive back the Knight by P ~ K5. 6.PxP BxP Naturally, Kt —- B3 could first be played. This would merely result in a transposition of moves. 7. P - Q3 Kt —-B3 Now Black has actually obtained a slight advantage in develop- ment since White needs two moves to develop his King’s Bishop. Black has undeniably the better position. He must, however, strive to maintain the advanced Queen’s pawn, the great strength of his game. 8. QKt — Q2 P — B4! This prevents Kt —K4, strengthens the centre, opens for the King’s Knight its best square for development and nullifies the disadvantage of the original blocking move. The develop- ment by KKt — K2 and Castles was also good enough. 9. P-Kt3 Kt — B3 10. B —- Kt2 Castles 11. Castles Q —- Kl Black’s game has improved still further; he has complete con- trol of the centre and now intends to develop the Queen at KR4 where she threatens to become aggressive in conjunction with the ever impending advance of the King’s pawn. 12. Kt — Kt3 B -—-Q3 Here—an exceptional case—there was to be considered the sacrifice of the “Minor Exchange’”’ by P —- QKt3 so that after the exchange the Queen’s pawn should be more strongly sup- ported. The move would, however, have been a mistake, as White could demonstrate by playing not Kt x B but Kt x KP!. If the Queen recaptures, then White captures the Knight with his Bishop; if, instead, the Knight recaptures, then White wins the Exchange by BxR. Thus at any time one can lose a favourable game by a quite plausible move which is not recog- nised as a mistake till afterwards. It is generally pawn moves which most quickly and fundamentally compromise a position, since pawns, unlike pieces, cannot go back again. 13. P-K3 410 GAMES With this move White at last captures the strategic point, his Q4, and forces Black to exchange his advanced Queen’s pawn for the King’s Bishop’s pawn (not the King’s) and thus lose several tempi. But Black’s position is already so good that this exchange has no unfavourable effect; on the contrary, he is able to turn this “misfortune” to advantage by attacking the weak point, White’s K3, in conjunction with the King’s side attack which he had in view when playing Q — K1. is eee PxP 14.PxP Kt —-KKt5 15. Q - Q2 It would have been better for the Queen to go to K2 at once, so that, if need arose, the point K3 might be guarded by B-QBI1. 15. .... Q - R4 Threatening to drive away the Knight by P-K5 and then mate at KR7. 16. P-K4 White has only inferior counter-moves at his disposal. P ~ KR3 would still further weaken the castled position and, in par- ticular, the King’s Knight’s pawn. If B-RIl, then Black continues his attack very strongly by P —- Bd. 16. .... P—-B5 Threatening to strengthen the attack still further by Kt — K6. 17,.PxP Now White’s King’s position is broken up and in a few moves will be stormed. YW Pare R x P! 18. B-Bl Kt — Q5 In order to open for the King’s Bishop the diagonal to White’s KR2., 19. QKt x Kt Px Kt 20. Q —-K2 We see that White has lost a valuable tempo with the Queen. 20. «4+. R x Kt! GAMES 411 By this elegant and correct sacrifice of the Exchange Black secures the removal of the last pawn in front of the castled King, who is now almost defenceless and exposed to numerous attacks. 21.RxR If the Bishop captures, then after 21....B xP, ch; 22. K-Rl the correct continuation of the attack is not altogether easy. There follows: 22.... B—Kt6, ch; 23. K-Ktl, Q-R85! (threatening Kt -R7 which would regain the Exchange and lead to a winning attack); 24. BxKt, BxB; 25. Q-QBz2, R — K1 and the Rook makes a decisive entry via K4 and KR4 or, perhaps, via K3 and KKt3. If after 21.BxR, BxP,ch White plays 22. K —- Kt2?, then the winning continuation is much more simple, wz. 22.... Kt —K6, ch; 23. Bx Kt, Q-—R6, ch; 24. K-Rl, B-—BB8, ch; 25. K -Ktl, Bx B, ch; 26. R —- B2, Q — Kt6, ch, etc. 4 eee Q x P, ch 22. K - Bl Q — Rd! Cutting off the further flight of the King and threatening to regain the exchange by Kt — R7, ch. 23. K —- Ktl Kt — R7 This wins, but there is an even stronger continuation in 23.... B—R7, ch; 24. K -Bl or Rl, B-Kt6; 25. K —-Ktl, Kt — K4. It threatens a strengthening of the attack by the bringing up of the last reserves (B—Kt5, etc.). If 26. R-B5!, then Black does not take the Rook but plays 26.... P—KKt3!, with the continuation 27. R x Kt, B x R and now the Queen’s Bishop enters at KKt5 and the Rook at KBI so that the threatened mate at KR2 is difficult to prevent. 24. R - B2 B-KKt5 This Bishop is developed unusually late; Black has not been able to do it before because of his attacking moves. 25. Q —- Q2 B - Kt6 26. R — B4 A big mistake, as so often happens in lost positions. White allows his opponent to bring his last piece into play with the gain of a tempo. He should, instead, have done this himself 412 GAMES by R-—R2 and might then, perhaps, have brought about an end-game, although a lost one. A brilliant finish now follows. 26. .... BxR 27.QxB R-—KBI! We see that Black’s advantage now consists in a superiority of seven tempi against three. (The position of his Knight counts as three tempi). The Rook’s move is immediately decisive. If White captures the Knight, then mate follows in two moves by Q -KS8, ch, etc. If Q-Q2, then the same continuation as in the actual gameleads to mate. The best move is 28. Q —Q6, whereupon there follows 28.... Kt — B6, ch; 29. Bx Kt, BxB and the mate threatened by checks at R8, Kt7 and K7 is difficult to prevent, e.g. 30. R-R2, Q-RS8, ch; 31. K -B2, Q -Kt7, ch; 32. K—K1, Q-Kt8, ch; 33. K—-Q2, Q-Q8, mate; or, if (instead of 30. R—R2) 30. Q-—Q85, ch, then 30.... K -R1; 31. Q —- KKt5, Q — K8, ch; 32. K — R2, Q — R8 ch; 33. K —Kt3, Q —Kt7, ch; 34. K -R4, Q—R7, mate. 28. Q — Kt5 R — B8, ch!! White resigned, probably thinking that after 29. BxR the Queen would be won by 29.... Kt-—B6, ch. This is, however, a mistake, for after 30. K —Kt2 Black mates by 30.... Q — R7. A brilliant game, both strategically and tactically. As it will probably go the round of the whole world, we may anticipate that the move 2. P — B4 will be discredited and of the once so dreaded Réti’s Opening nothing will remain but Zukertort’s favourite move 1. Kt -KB3 with a subsequent transposition into the Queen’s Pawn Game. -% Game No. 11 Played in the Vienna tournament, 1908. White: Spielmann; Black: P. Johner. 1.P-K4 P-—K4 2. B-B4 Kt - KB3 Position after Black’s 27th move GAMES 413 3. P-Q3 Kt - B3 4. Kt -QB3 B-B4 5. P - B4 That at the second move this gambit is incorrect I am quite certain, and even here, where its direct refutation by P —Q4 is impossible, it seems to me to be disadvantageous. Oi sixs P -Q3 Regarding the opening see p. 312 where the position after 6. Kt —- B3 (instead of 6. P — B5) is treated under the King’s Gambit Declined. 6. P-B5 This continuation, although apparently strong, is a decided mistake and is absolutely refuted in this game which, in conse- quence, is of particular importance. eee Kt — Q5! As a counter-action against the cramping of his King’s side by P—B5 Black plans a general advance on the Queen’s by P — B3, P - QKt4, P — QR4, etc., for which the Knight’s move prepares the way. The plan is excellent and the execution faultless. Thus there results one of those games, fine both in strategic conception and tactical execution, which are the delight of the connoisseur. This game is one of the finest played in the Vienna tournament of 1908, although in it there occurs no sacrifice, indeed not even a combination. Many chess- players, however—and among them even first-class masters— estimate the beauty of a game only by the value of the material sacrificed. 7.B-Ktd Instead of the Bishop move, 7. Kt — R4 (in order to drive away the troublesome Knight as soon as possible) had strong claims to consideration. However, there would follow: 7.... P —QKt4; 8. KtxB, PxB; 9. Kt-R4, PxP; 10.QxP, B-—Kt2 with a good game for Black. Other moves also, e.g. Kt -B3 or P—KKt4 cannot disguise the fact that, as a result of the two moves of White’s King’s Bishop’s pawn, Black has already the better game and is about to build up an attack, while it will soon be obvious to White that he, himself, has not the remotest chance of one. (fer P — B3 414 GAMES With this move Black already threatens to break up White’s pawn position by 8.... P—-Kt4; 9. B-~Kt3, P-QRé4; 10. P—QR4, KtxB. White must, therefore, attempt to prevent this by advancing his Queen’s Rook’s pawn. Position after Black’s 7th move 8. P—~QR3 Instead of this move, 8. P-QR4 had to be considered. By 8....Q-—Ré4 (threatening 9....P—Kt4; 10.PxP, QxR, fol- lowed by Kt x P, ch) Black would have achieved nothing for there would have followed 9. B —-Q2, which might have given rise to the following interesting variation: 9.... P~QKt4; 10. Kt x P, Q —-Kt3; 11. P—R5, Q—Kt2; 11. Kt x Kt, B x Kt; 12. P-B3, Bx Kt; 13. RxB,QxP; 14. B —Kt3 (threatening to win the Queen by R —-R2), R-QKtl1; 15. R- Ktl, Q — R6; 17. B xP, ch, followed by R xR, and White is the Exchange ahead. But in reply to 8. P—QR¢4 Black could with advantage have played 8.... Q —Kt3 (instead of Q — R4) for then he would have threatened not only the Queen’s Knight’s pawn but also (after Kt x P, ch or Kt x BP) the King’s Knight. 8... P-Kt4 Now Q — Kt3 would be weak because of the reply Kt -— R4. 9.B-R2 Q -Kt3 . 10. Kt-B3 Naturally, B x Kt, as played later on, could have been tried here—but without any favourable result. 10. .... P —-QR4 GAMES 415 It is remarkable how strong Black’s attack already is. The threat is not P—Kt5 (because of Kt -QR4) but first P-R5 and then P — Kt5, and to this White has no effective counter. 11. R—-KBI1 White dare not castle on the King’s side and castling on the Queen’s, right in front of the advancing pawns, is also out of the question. | eee P-R5 12. Kt x Kt There is no better defence. i Dae Bx Kt 13. B x Kt? This is the decisive mistake. The game was, perhaps, still to be saved by B — Q2 which would have prevented the imminent and most dangerous attack, P — Kt5, e.g. 13. B-Q2, P —-Kt5?; 14.PxP, QxP; 15. Kt-—Q5, QxP; 16.R-QKtl, QB; 17. Kt — B7, ch, followed by Kt x R, and the Knight can escape; or (instead of 15. Kt -Q5) 15. KtxP, QxKt; 16. BP, ch, KxB; 17.RxQ, RxR; 18.P-B3 and White has the advantage. 1Bivces PxB 14. Q-R5 Making way for the Knight. 14. .... R-Bl The more obvious guard by R — R2 would, however, have been bad, for then in reply to P -Kt5 White could play Kt x P. 15. Kt - Ql] P — Kt5! Very pretty. If P x P, then P -—R6 and wins. 16. R-Bl There is no other way of meeting the threat of P x P for, if R -QKtl, then P — Kt6 wins the Bishop. All these continua- tions are as simple as they are pretty. 16. .... PxP Much stronger than the permanent imprisonment of the Bishop by P -Kté. 17.PxP Q — B4 416 GAMES Once again, the strongest move. 18. P~B3 QxP 19. R - QB2 B—Kt3 20.QxP Now White also has a strong passed pawn but Black has, besides his passed pawn, an attack that has only momentarily died down but in a few moves revives with decisive strength. 20. .... Q — B4 The only move by Black that is, perhaps, not the very strongest. B — R3 was more natural. Probably, however, it would merely have resulted in a transposition of moves. 21. Q — Kt7 B-R3 22. R - B3 B--Q] Much stronger than 22....Q —Kt8, ch; 23. K —K2, Q x P after which White could play R — R3 followed by either R — R8 or R -R7. 23. P —-R4 A dangerous passed pawn which apparently can meet with little hindrance on its short journey to R8. 23. .... P — Q4! As a reply to P-KB5, P-Q4 must always be played—and here this counter-stroke is at last made—but after 17 moves! Nevertheless, it is quickly decisive. 24. P—~R5 After 24.PxP, PxP Black eventually breaks through by P —K5. 24. .... PxP 25. PxP Q — Kt8, ch 26. K — Q2 B-—K2 In order to give a terrible check at QI] with the Rook. White is completely helpless. 27. R-QBI R - QI, ch! Not 27.... Castles, ch because the Rook must be able to attack from QKtl. 28. K — B2 Q-KS8 GAMES 417 Threatening, among other things, Q-—Q7,ch followed by R - Ktl, ch. 29. R —- B2 Apparently an oversight for now Black could win at once by Rx Kt followed by QxR(B7), ch. But Black aims higher and now ends this fine game with a fine mate. 29. .... B-R6 30. Q - Kt4 Only by problem moves! could the mate have been delayed. 30. .... B — Q6, mate. GAME No. 12 Played in the San Sebastian tournament, 1912. White: Spielmann; Black: Dr. Tarrasch. 1.P-K4 P—K4 2. Kt -KB3 Kt — QB3 3. B-Kt5 P —-QR3 4.B-—R4 Kt —B3 5. Castles Kt x P! This I hold to be the best—and completely satisfactory— defence to the Ruy Lopez. For a long time its worth was brought into question by the strong attacking move 8. P - QR4. However, since Schlechter in his match with Dr. Lasker demon- strated a strong counter to that move in 8.... Kt x QP, which has been endorsed by further investigations, there is no longer any fault to be found with this defence. 6. P— Q4 P —- QKt4 7. B-Kt3 P—-Q4 8. P-QR4 ¢¢99) This move, that once seemed so strong, almost deserves a for after it White has difficulty in equalising the game. He should, instead, play PxP, to which B-K3 is the reply. Regarding the opening see p. 284. Bicesy Kt x QP! 9. Kt x Kt P x Kt 10. Kt -B3 1 In this case, ruinous loss of material. 2&5 418 GAMES The strongest continuation, suggested by Berger. 10. .... Kt x Kt! Much stronger than Kt - B3. If, instead, P x Kt?, then B x P. 11.PxKt P - QB4! The best move, first played in the Cologne tournament, 1911. The move is very unpleasant for White for now he is continually threatened with the imprisonment of his King’s Bishop and can avoid disadvantage only by the most extremely careful play. 12.RP xP B -K2 P — B5 at once would be bad because of the reply B — R4 with the threat of a discovered check. 13. Q - B3? An attacking move when only the most careful—I might say, the most anxious—defence could redeem the situation—be- cause already it is a question of redemption. The imprison- ment of the Bishop could have been avoided (1) by P - QB4, a move which, however, I do not like since Black keeps strong centre pawns and, perhaps, remains a pawn ahead; and (2)— and this was the best line of play—by 13. BP xP, P -—B5; 14. B—R4, Castles; 15.P xP, RxP; 16.P—-QB3. At the next move White develops the Queen’s Bishop and then he retreats the other, unscathed, to QB2, with an almost even game. 13. .... B-K3 14,.R xP Castles! Not R xR for then the Bishop would threaten to escape via QR4 to QB6. 15. P xP P —B5 16. B-R2 If B-R4, then Black gets the advantage by the interesting move B —- Q2 which threatens to win a piece. 16. .... RxR 17.PxR Q —R4 '18. B-Ktl P— B6 This shuts in the Bishop for ever—a position that one seldom sees. 19. Q -Kt3 : GAMES 419 White is trying for an attack but there is no possibility of one. i eee R-Bl In order to be able to capture the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. 20. P - B4 B — B4 gives no better result. 20. .... B-KB4 21.R-K1 B-B3 22. K -Rl In order to reply toQ xP? withQxP. If 22....B x QP, then White could still get some sort of a game by 23. B-K3. Black, therefore, declines the immediate gain of a pawn and plays rather for the complete crippling of his opponent. ae P-R3 In order at last to capture the Queen’s Rook’s pawn. 23. P—R3 R-Ktl 24. B-K3 QxP Q -R8 would have been without point because of the reply P -R7, 25. R-QI1 Q-R8 26. Q-K1 B -K5 One would now think that White’s game must soon collapse— but this is not so. The game is still very hard to win. Black intends next to play his Rook to KKt3. 27. K —R2 B -K2 28. Q-Bl Here the Queen has more chances. 28. .... P —-B4 In order to prevent P — Béd once and for all. 29. R-Kl B-R5 Extremely important, as the end of the game will show. The Bishop’s move provokes a weakening of the King’s side. If, instead of P —-Kt3, White moves his Rook, then after R — Kt3 and R —Kt3 the pawn move must be played. 30. P —Kt3 B -K2 31. B-B2 420 GAMES ; In order to protect the exposed King against a flank attack by R —Kt7 or Q-Kt7. Spielmann makes all that is possible of his position but he is fighting for a lost cause. 31. .... B-Q3 32. R -Bl Position after White’s 32nd move Now Black had to consider the move P~Kt4. He discarded it on account of the following continuation, 17 moves deep: 32.... P—Kt4; 33. B-—K3, Px P; 34.BxP, BxB; 35. Q xB, RxB; 36.QxRP!, RxR; 37.Q-—Kt6,ch, K-BI; 38. Q - B6, ch, K —K1; 39. Q —-K6, ch, K —Q1; 40. Q — Q6, ch, K-Bl; 41.Q-—B6,ch, K-Ktl; 42.Q-Kt6,ch, K-RI; 43. Q — B6, ch, K —-R2; 44. Q - B7, ch, K —R3; 45. Q - B6, ch, K-R4; 46.Q-B5,ch, K-R5; 47.Q-Ri,ch, K-Kt6; 48. Q-B5, ch and the remarkable thing is that the King can- not escape from perpetual check. 82. sis K —R2 33. R -Kl White has no better move. 33. .... R -Kt3 34. R - Bl B—R6 Now things are getting serious. 35. R -K1 Q —- Kt7 36. Q — K2 (see diagram on page 421) GAMES 421 Position after White’s 36th move mats AA EO 36. .... R —Ktd In order to play R ~— R5 followed by B — Q3 and R - R8. 37. R —-Ktl Threatening to obtain, if possible, a desperate attack by P — Kt4. 37. .... R - Kt3 Preparing to meet that sortie with R —- Kt3 and B - Q3. 38. R -K1 Q —- Kt4 Played to prevent the possibility of Q- R6 later on. If White exchanges, then the end-game is easily won by Black. (He continues with R—Kt7). If, instead of exchanging, White plays 39.B-—R2, then 39...QxQ; 40.RxQ, R-Kt7; 41. B-Kt3, Rx B; 42. P xR, P -B7 and Black ends up with two Bishops to a Rook. 39. Q —- R5 A really cunning move, as is shown by the following quite plausible continuation: 39....B-—Q3; 40. B-—R2!, Bx QBP; 41.Q-B7, B-K5; 42.RxB, BPxR; 43.BxP and the resurrection of the dead Bishop forces at least a draw—if not more. However, the move gives Black the opportunity for the follow- ing very pretty and complicated final combination. 39. .... Q x B! This Queen sacrifice had been in the air for some moves, ¢.g. instead of 36.... R —Kt5 but then it would not have been good (see diagram after White’s 36th move): 36....Q xB; 37. R xQ, 422 GAMES . RxR; 38. P-Kt4, R -QB8; 39. Q —-R6, B - QKt7; 40. PxP (threatening perpetual check), Bx KBP; 41. Q-Q6, B-K5; 42.P-—B5, Bx KBP; 43. Q xP and a win for Black is by no means certain. Now, however, mate or the loss of White’s Queen is forced. 40.RxQ RxR Now we see the sad consequences of the exposure of the King’s position by P—KKt3. If White guards against the mate threatened at his KR1 by playing B-—Ktl, then R-QB8 follows, with the threat of Rx P, ch, and again it is all but mate. 41.P-Kt4 Position after White’s 4Ist move ee nd +8 = Matane Wa WA re Vi R77] Ze Z "Oo Uk wy S ey Lol Youn? og 3 eee B — B8!! Threatening 42....BxP,ch; 43. B-Kt3, R-—R8, mate. 41.... B—Q3 would have been bad because of 42. B —K3, P—Kt3; 43. Q-—R4, P-Kt4; 44. Q —-R5 and White threatens perpetual check. The move B—-B8 is analogous to the blocking move of the “Indian Problem’’}; intrinsically it is an extraordinarily un- likely, even ugly move, since the Rook which is to give mate 1 The reference is to the well-known problem by Rev. H. A. Loveday of Delhi which appeared in the Ohess Player’s Chronicle of February 1845. The position is: White: King at QR1, Rook at Ql, Bishops at KKt2 and KR6, Pawns at QR2, QKt3, KB2 and KKt4; Black: King at K5, Knight at KB6, Pawns at QKt3, QKt4 and K4. White to play and mate in four moves. Solution: 1.B-QBI, P-Ktéb; 2.K-Ktl, P-—Kt4; 3.R -Q2, K-B5; 4. R-Q4, mate. (Actually, a waiting move, e.g. GAMES . 423 is masked. The “Indian” character of the move is seen most clearly in the following variation: 42. K ~Ktl, B-XK6, ch!; 43. K —-R2, BxP, ch; 44. B-Kt3, R-—R8, mate. Another possibility is 42.B-K1, BxP,ch; 43.K-Ktl, B-Kté! followed by mate or the gain of the Queen. The main variation is 42. K—Kt3, P—Kt3; 43. Q-—R4, BxP,ch!; 44.K xB, P —Kt4, ch, and Black wins. White resigned. kkk 1.K -Ktl, 1.R-Q8 or 1.B-RIl, could be played and then after 1.... P - Kt5, the move 2. B -QB1 with the continuation given above). In this Problem the piece which is to give the mate—the Bishop—is blocked by another—the Rook. In Dr. Tarrasch’s game, as he points out, the Rook, which in most variations is to givo the mate, is blocked by the Bishop.